[Amit Varma]: What is a teacup? When I look at a teacup, I see a cup in which I drink tea. But others
[Amit Varma]: might see more in it. Looking at a teacup, they might see all the forces of history that
[Amit Varma]: shape it, the habits of society in a moment in time, all the different cultural influences
[Amit Varma]: around that give it the shape and weight and texture that we take for granted. A teacup
[Amit Varma]: contains so much information that it might even be talking to you. And all you have to
[Amit Varma]: do is listen. Now, at one level, I think this might be overthinking it, chai piyo aash karo.
[Amit Varma]: But at another level, it is true that all the inanimate things around us have rich histories
[Amit Varma]: and are full of meaning, if only we choose to look for them. I often say we should never
[Amit Varma]: take people for granted. Well, maybe we shouldn't take things for granted as well.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen. My guest today is Annapurna Garimela, a designer, curator
[Amit Varma]: and art historian. She was one of my fellow judges for the JCB prize for literature earlier
[Amit Varma]: this year, just like the author Sarah Rai, who features in episode 255 of the show. Annapurna
[Amit Varma]: comes from a different imaginative world and sensibility than mine. And I loved our brief
[Amit Varma]: conversation so much that I figured I had to get her on this show and have a longer
[Amit Varma]: chat. We finally made it happen. She shared her rich memories of growing up in a world
[Amit Varma]: that was partly rural and partly urban. I was struck by the richness and detail in her
[Amit Varma]: memories and felt that a world had opened up to me. We spoke about remembering and reflecting,
[Amit Varma]: academia and scholarship, art and access, the different ways in which we see the world.
[Amit Varma]: We also argued a bit. She's wary of markets, while I love markets and technology because
[Amit Varma]: they've empowered and liberated individual creators like me and freed me from the whims
[Amit Varma]: of elite gatekeepers. Some of our conversation was transcendental, and some was combative.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure you'll find lots to think about. You'll also never look at teacups in quite
[Amit Varma]: the same way.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is, how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500
[Amit Varma]: if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com
[Amit Varma]: and use the code UNSEEN. Up level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Anupona, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me. It's very gracious of you.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm really looking forward to our conversation in an odd way because I feel like I know very
[Amit Varma]: little about you. Most of my guests are people whose books I might have read or whose work
[Amit Varma]: I have followed and all of that. And we've of course, you and I have interacted during
[Amit Varma]: the Zoom jury meetings of the JCB Prize and all of that. So in a sense, I feel like I
[Amit Varma]: know you, but I also feel like I don't know more about you. I have a sense of who you
[Amit Varma]: are, but not really knowledge of what makes you who you are or what makes you what you
[Amit Varma]: are and so on and so forth, which is a sort of an interesting place to be in. So I want
[Amit Varma]: to really start right at the beginning. Tell me about, you know, where you were born, where
[Amit Varma]: you grew up, the texture of your life, of the young Anupona's life when you were a kid.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think, you know, another interesting facet that I often explore during the show
[Amit Varma]: is talking to guests who are my age or older or from decades past, as it were, and talking
[Amit Varma]: about their lives because the texture of life was so different then. You know, one of my
[Amit Varma]: friends once said that kids growing up today will never know what it is to be lost, like
[Amit Varma]: physically lost because you have maps. They might even never know what it is to be bored
[Amit Varma]: in that sense of having nothing to do. They can be bored in different ways. But you know,
[Amit Varma]: they can be immersed in a smartphone. Well, I think back in the day, I could just be immersed
[Amit Varma]: in a book or, you know, Sarah, our mutual friend once, you know, when I recorded with
[Amit Varma]: her a few days back, she said this very interesting thing where she said that she was a deep reader
[Amit Varma]: from a very early age because of the dullness of life. There was nothing else. And I asked
[Amit Varma]: her about observation skills, which, as you would have realized, are incredibly acute.
[Amit Varma]: And she said that I noticed things so well, because there was nothing else to do. You
[Amit Varma]: had to look at things. And I don't buy that explanation because many other people lived
[Amit Varma]: in those times and her powers of observation are extraordinary. So give me a sense of what
[Amit Varma]: the texture of your young years were wherever you born. What was that like?
[Guest]: So I was born in 1966 in June in my grandparents' house in rural Andhra Pradesh in East Godavari
[Guest]: District. So this area is called Kona Seema. People who are aware of Indian languages will
[Guest]: understand that this is a delta. Kona is for tri, for delta and Seema is the boundary area.
[Guest]: So this is an agrarian landscape that's today one of the richest agrarian regions in India.
[Guest]: And it really became that rich because of the construction of the Buckingham Canal,
[Guest]: which comes from Orissa all the way down to Pondicherry. And Mr. Cotton, who has a museum
[Guest]: dedicated to him in Rajahmundry, created innumerable canals that flow through this delta village
[Guest]: to village and inundated the landscape, the rivers that were flowing out of the Godavari
[Guest]: Nakrishna into the Bay of Bengal were directed before they flowed out into the landscape.
[Guest]: So the time I came to this landscape, it was, it looked like it had been rich and fertile
[Guest]: forever, but in fact was probably only that fertile for about 100, 150 years. So I'm named
[Guest]: Annapurna because on my paternal side, somebody went to Varanasi where she's the goddess of
[Guest]: the city. And she is a very important goddess for Telugu speaking people. Telugu speaking
[Guest]: priests are the priests at the temple of Annapurna. And he came back, he did a padiyatra and he
[Guest]: came back and he came back safe and sound. So he took a vow that the first child of every
[Guest]: family in his lineage would be named after her. So I am named Annapurna after this. So
[Guest]: these kinds of things completely shape you. So my grandfather, my, both my grandmothers
[Guest]: are Annapurna and my grandfather adored me. I am one of 30 children of his surviving 10
[Guest]: children. There were many pregnancies. He adored my grandmother, I think. And therefore
[Guest]: there are a lot of children. They produce children and we are 30 and I'm this, and they're
[Guest]: primarily all boys. We're only nine girls out of this. And I'm the second oldest girl
[Guest]: and the girl that spent the most time with everyone else for various reasons, which I
[Guest]: can explain if you'd like. And because I spent so much of my time between my grandparents'
[Guest]: village and also Bhopal where my father worked as a junior engineer at BHEL, I had these
[Guest]: two things of India, which I think are the things of India that people think of post-independence
[Guest]: as a dynamic that had to be negotiated. Rurality and industrial development, rural development
[Guest]: and industrial development. So my grandfather was very interesting. I come from an upper
[Guest]: caste Brahmin family. And of course there are things that are mythologized by me and
[Guest]: by all of us, but he was a very kind man. And the atmosphere that he permeated everywhere
[Guest]: was of a person who was an only child and had many children, many sisters. The father
[Guest]: was not alive, so he had to take care of all those sisters. So in my grandparents' house,
[Guest]: his six daughters, his wife, and his four or five sisters, they're all having babies
[Guest]: at the same time. So I had that world and the world of being in Bhopal, living in the
[Guest]: quarters, the ground level quarters. So there was a garden and I was there by myself. And
[Guest]: I was an only child for 10 years. So it was this really interesting dichotomy between
[Guest]: being surrounded in the village with lots of people and being in Bhopal with very few
[Guest]: people in the household except my parents. And I think that because it was so dichotomous,
[Guest]: it prompted me to constantly adjust. And if you're constantly adjusting, you start reflecting
[Guest]: on what you're adjusting. And then the reflection on what you're adjusting begins to make you
[Guest]: think about adjusting itself. Or it did to me. This is over time. It's not like it popped
[Guest]: into my head at age four or something. But also what it does is, growing up that way
[Guest]: for me anyway, my grandfather made it perfectly okay. He was a very modern man in his own
[Guest]: way. So he wanted a Chevrolet. He practiced the rituals of Brahmanical masculinity to
[Guest]: satisfy my grandmother to some extent, like doing things like Sandhyavadana. But outside
[Guest]: of the house, he didn't really practice caste untouchability at all. So I went with him
[Guest]: to the fields whenever I was there, and we would sit all day in the field, which he would
[Guest]: do, I think, basically to enjoy that time. And our best friends were the people who worked
[Guest]: in the fields, I think. And of course, there was total complex hierarchy, but he also felt
[Guest]: an enormous responsibility. So funding their children's marriages and education, none of
[Guest]: them are field hands anymore. They're all moved on, and my family doesn't have that
[Guest]: house anymore. So they still have the roots there. So these are all interesting things.
[Guest]: But my grandfather swam, and he believed, I think, caste doesn't matter because water
[Guest]: is flowing, and water is washing everyone. So he had these ideas, I think. I don't know
[Guest]: if we ever talked about it. We never talked about it. But sometimes, if you're observing
[Guest]: people and you see the way they carry themselves, he was a big man. The way he carried himself,
[Guest]: you understood that his shoulders were not scared of the touch. He wasn't scrunching
[Guest]: himself. He was wide open to bounce, for his shoulders to rub against other kinds of shoulders,
[Guest]: those kinds of things. At home, in our house, we were a very wealthy family. So Burma teak
[Guest]: granaries, seven of them, were filled with rice. And they were the size of the height
[Guest]: of this building that we're in right now, 1-1 Granary. And that kind of wealth was there.
[Guest]: And so my childhood was spent playing in the granaries, playing with tamarind seeds, making
[Guest]: palm leaf dolls. Because I spent so much time with them, there was this ritual of the door
[Guest]: being opened in the morning, and then it would stay open all day long till night when we
[Guest]: went to sleep. And this was a huge ceremonial teak door. And it was a house that was built
[Guest]: about more than, now it still exists, it's more than 150 years old. So architecture,
[Guest]: which is one of the things I study very deeply, formed in my head. And relationships, like
[Guest]: the side passages in which lower caste or women who had their periods or people who
[Guest]: had to perform some kind of service, they came, or foods that were not allowed to be
[Guest]: cooked inside the main kitchen, all these things were designated, there were spaces
[Guest]: for them. His mother lived there, my great-grandmother lived there, she decided to have her own kitchen
[Guest]: to have a different relationship with her daughter-in-law. And these granaries were,
[Guest]: there was a big teak box, I would say it's about, it was about three feet or four feet
[Guest]: deep and about five to six feet wide, which was filled with grain. And in the morning
[Guest]: in this door, which was never closed, people would come and they'd say,
[Guest]: Dehi bhikshan dehi mata annapurneshwari.
[Guest]: And my grandfather and my grandmother, not my grandfather, but my grandmother and my aunts
[Guest]: and uncles, they would tell me to go give it. And later on, my partner gave me the insight
[Guest]: that perhaps it was an interesting way for a small hand to give small quantity in ritual,
[Guest]: that you're giving something, but that you didn't get into the discourse with the child
[Guest]: about, is this enough, is this not enough, all these sort of things. But that kind of
[Guest]: programs you, like what is your identity is programmed when you're named after the food
[Guest]: goddess, when your task in your grandparents' house is to give the food. There's so much
[Guest]: cooking in our household and preparations of vadis and pickles, and you know, aunt has
[Guest]: very rich in mangoes of various kinds, very famous for its pickles, so lots of pickles
[Guest]: and poppards were made on lungis in the summers. And going to the film theater, as you may
[Guest]: know, many film theaters in Andhra, the architecture of them is based on rice mills, the person
[Guest]: who talks about them is SV Srinivas. And we would go to theaters, this was a big thing,
[Guest]: my aunt and I would go in a horse and horse cart. I can't believe I have this life. We
[Guest]: would go in a horse cart at night and we would sit in the theater and watch movies. They
[Guest]: called this the Gandhi class and then there was other classes in this theater. You start,
[Guest]: it's very odd because there are many places I understood about caste and class and gender,
[Guest]: but I also understood that there were always people who were transgressing those boundaries.
[Guest]: And that's very important to me to know, hold those two things in my head because I focus
[Guest]: on this, I forget this. And if I focus on this, I forget this. So I keep that in practice,
[Guest]: whether it's in my work or in the way that I understand the politics of the spaces I
[Guest]: live in, the country that I live in, or the places I've lived in. So that was my childhood
[Guest]: in my village. In Bhopal, it was very different. In any case, my grandfather was very interested
[Guest]: in me being very independent. So from the beginning, and he was very tender with me.
[Guest]: So getting my nose pierced is his thing, getting my ears pierced is his thing. And he did all
[Guest]: sorts of wrong things. Like he told the jeweler who would be sitting opposite me, pierce her
[Guest]: ears and pierce her nose. That was at a later point. In Andhra, women get their nose pierced
[Guest]: on the right side, but he told him to do it on the right. He didn't specify to the jeweler
[Guest]: from his right, so my right, not his. So he pierced me on the wrong side. And of course,
[Guest]: my grandmother and my mother, everybody scolded my grandfather intensely for doing the ritually
[Guest]: wrong thing. And these things, so in a way, I feel like he made it okay to be not fitting
[Guest]: in or something like that. And then when we lived in Bhopal, I was very much an independent
[Guest]: person. So Bhopal, that colony, BHL colony, was relatively far out of the city. At three
[Guest]: and four, I would just walk out and walk onto the national highway, and then my father's
[Guest]: friend would pick me up and bring me back home. And this was like a real problem for
[Guest]: my parents, my sense of sovereignty, maybe, or autonomy, or a sense that maybe it's not
[Guest]: even sovereign. Maybe it's a sense that the universe is good with me, and I can live in
[Guest]: it with some fearlessness. And I think I was a very hard child for my parents. I think
[Guest]: that's also very important for me to state, since you asked this question. I loved my
[Guest]: mother very much. I have some memories of my father taking me every Sunday when he went
[Guest]: vegetable shopping to the old city of Bhopal, and me standing in front of his Vespa scooter.
[Guest]: And my hands would be on the handlebar, and I would see that I had two, three glass bangles,
[Guest]: and I'd come back, and I'd see my hands, and they'd be full of glass bangles. So this was
[Guest]: a weekly ritual. These are very nice memories. My father was a very deep listener of classical
[Guest]: music, Carnatic music. And as a junior engineer, he already purchased a reel-to-reel tape machine
[Guest]: in the 1960s in Bhopal. It's a very expensive thing to purchase, have. So from a very young
[Guest]: age, I have a practice of sitting and listening to music continuously for two to three hours.
[Guest]: Doesn't mean that I wasn't irritated sometimes, but nobody asked me to do it, but it's just
[Guest]: something that entered me. At that time, BHEL employees, engineers would go to England because
[Guest]: the connection to England was still very strong, industrial England. So my uncle, who happened
[Guest]: to be an engineer at BHEL also, so this is also, we must remember that the reason why
[Guest]: so many South Indian Brahmins have advanced is because the family connections allowed
[Guest]: them to develop these kinds of economic ladders between families and for each other. So he
[Guest]: asked my father to come and work there. And I had a very severe illness when I was young,
[Guest]: and they thought I would die. So my uncle had gone to Liverpool for training, and he
[Guest]: brought back for me cod liver oil tablets and those tiny little record players for short,
[Guest]: small records, right? And what did he bring back for me? They were the Beatles records
[Guest]: and they were rainbow colored. So there was a guava tree in my parents' garden, and my
[Guest]: grandmother had given me a small, tiny bell metal pot for play cooking. And there was
[Guest]: this little record player, and I would make these little bridges between the trees for
[Guest]: water and I'd put this thing on, and I would listen to, I think it was Strawberry Fields
[Guest]: and a couple of other records over and over again and cook. I think when I say I love
[Guest]: places, when I think of myself and I say I love places, I think it's the idea of making
[Guest]: a place began there and making a place and knowing places like the garden or my grandparents'
[Guest]: house. They're very profound experiences. So Bhopal was really, really also a beautiful
[Guest]: place to know people from all over India because these quarters, these early days of these
[Guest]: mega industries had people, there's a Maharashtrian auntie and uncle upstairs. There were other
[Guest]: caste Andhra people working, Telugu speaking people, Punjabi people. And the great thing
[Guest]: that marked my life as a child was that these industries gave leave travel allowance to
[Guest]: their employees. So what many engineers and families did, they rented a bus and then they
[Guest]: would drive from Bhopal to various places. We would stay in gurudwaras. We would have
[Guest]: langar because obviously there wasn't that much money. In this process, I saw so much
[Guest]: of the Gangetic belt of Rajasthan, Gujarat, all the way to Varanasi. And I think my first
[Guest]: sense that architecture and archeology were going to be deeply profound things for me.
[Guest]: Well I remember, there are like three, four moments that are so crystal clear in my head.
[Guest]: One is like when we went to Abu and Girnar and Shatrunjaya, the sense of spaciousness
[Guest]: and being on top of mountains and these white temples, very, very powerful. And then another
[Guest]: really big moment was, as I mentioned to you in our conversation, Jaipur and being in Jaipur
[Guest]: and the Jori Bazaar and like the way that the textures of beads and stuff were really
[Guest]: important to me. But I think the two places that really impacted me were Khajuraho and
[Guest]: Varanasi. Khajuraho, my parents were not the most, I don't think anybody was in those
[Guest]: days, but my parents did not hover too much over me. And I'm probably not the kind of
[Guest]: person that people can hover over. And they left me on the plinth of one of the big temples.
[Guest]: I think it was Khandariya Mahadeva or the Lakshmana temple. And you know, even then,
[Guest]: this was the early days when the flights from Delhi to Varanasi had to stop over in Khajuraho.
[Guest]: So the triangle that they call, like it was beginning to happen. And I watched lots of
[Guest]: people looking at the erotic sculpture and looking at all of this. And I just had this
[Guest]: feeling of mere saare room kade ho gaye. I can even remember that moment now, of my hairs
[Guest]: on my arms, just standing up with the energy of this place, this structure. And it's, I
[Guest]: don't know if I had the sense to say, oh, this is beautiful or not beautiful. I knew
[Guest]: it was powerful. And not in a scary way, that it was powerful because somebody had designed
[Guest]: it to be intricate and full of stories and put lots of challenging things on it, like
[Guest]: erotic sculpture. Even then, we all know by that age, this is the thing that you're supposed
[Guest]: to know and not know about. And then the other place that's really important to me is Varanasi
[Guest]: because my mother went into, I think it was the Sankatmochan temple. And the mahant there
[Guest]: gave her a genda phool mala. And he put it over, he put it on my neck. And my mother
[Guest]: took me out onto the ghats, maybe it was busy or something. And she said, you stand here.
[Guest]: As I mentioned, they weren't really hovery kind of parents. And this cow came there and
[Guest]: started eating the genda phool on my mala. And I might have been four or five at the
[Guest]: most at this. And there was no fear inside of me. And then I thought like it's this,
[Guest]: if I look back, and of course, memory is very funny, and I'm not interested in analyzing
[Guest]: the truth of memory or not. You get what you get, and you live with that, right? So what
[Guest]: the memory tells me, and even at that moment, the memory that I have of my feeling is that
[Guest]: this place is so old and expansive, that nothing can hurt me. Not even this cow who's chewing
[Guest]: these flowers. And then of course, people started shouting, and then my mother heard
[Guest]: or something happened. And then she came and something happened. I don't remember the rest.
[Guest]: But I remember this moment very deeply. So this is my childhood in India. When I was
[Guest]: eight, I went to eight and a half, we moved to the United States. I was also a brief period
[Guest]: in Sikandrabad, where I went to the Kendriya Vidyalaya. I went to school in my grandparents'
[Guest]: village for a little while, because my father was already itching to go somewhere else where
[Guest]: he could fund his music obsession. He was interested in Carnatic music primarily. And
[Guest]: the school in my grandparents' village had cow dung on the floor. So every morning we
[Guest]: had to put cow dung on the floors and do a rangoli, mugu as we call it. And then Kendriya
[Guest]: Vidyalaya was really nice because it was in Pickett or someplace near there. There's many
[Guest]: Kendriya Vidyalayas now. Now I'm a little hazy. I was little at that moment. But it
[Guest]: was Sikandrabad and there were still fields in the middle of the city because it hadn't
[Guest]: grown so much. So you could see rice growing and that really deep green of rice. And it
[Guest]: was very nice. My entire childhood was filled with Hindi. Hindi, Telugu, of course, very
[Guest]: beautiful Telugu, but lots of Hindi because my mother and my father watched a hell of
[Guest]: a lot of Hindi movies. And my father would play people like Talat Mahmood and Soraya.
[Guest]: Begum Soraya? I forget her name. It'll come back to me. All these records. Talat Mahmood's
[Guest]: very vivid. KL Saigal. I love KL Saigal. And lots of music from there. So I don't remember
[Guest]: not having Carnatic music, The Beatles and Hindi film songs very close to me all my life
[Guest]: when I was growing up. And when I was eight and a half, I moved to the US.
[Amit Varma]: So so fascinating. One of the themes that I sort of love to explore and which I sort
[Amit Varma]: of will ask you about is the nature of memory, not in the sense you said you don't want to
[Amit Varma]: talk about, you know, truth and memory and all, but just the nature of memory itself,
[Amit Varma]: because a couple of thoughts. One is that when you're actually living and I'm really
[Amit Varma]: talking about, in a sense, looking back on how I have sort of lived and how I remember
[Amit Varma]: things that while living, sometimes you're not mindful. Things happen and you're not
[Amit Varma]: mindful of them in that moment. But later you remember them and in your memory, you
[Amit Varma]: fill those things out. And I did this episode I really loved with Anshul Malhotra, who wrote
[Amit Varma]: that fabulous book on, you know, partition survivors, their memories through the things
[Amit Varma]: that they got with them. And one of the things we discussed there was how we now know that
[Amit Varma]: how memory functions is when you remember something for the first time, you remember
[Amit Varma]: it, what actually happened. But the next time you remember it, you remember the remembering
[Amit Varma]: and so on down the line. It's almost like Chinese whispers inside your head, which is
[Amit Varma]: why, you know, something could happen to say you and your sister at exactly the same time,
[Amit Varma]: but you could have a completely different memories of it. And that leads me to the sort
[Amit Varma]: of thought that at one level, it's completely true that we are shaped by what happens to
[Amit Varma]: us. But it is also true in the other direction, that what we remember of what happens to us
[Amit Varma]: is shaped by who we are. And therefore, the question like all these beautiful details
[Amit Varma]: you came up with, the teak door, playing in the granaries, the tiny bell metal pot, all
[Amit Varma]: of these details, you know, and these are the things you remember, any of your siblings
[Amit Varma]: or cousins growing up with you would perhaps remember different things. And they are different
[Amit Varma]: people. And you've kind of hinted at being like a rebellious kid who would, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can't hover over Annapurna is the kind of sense that I already get from that. And
[Amit Varma]: it's not just that you are shaped by everything happening to you, because it's also happening
[Amit Varma]: to others. So where do you begin to get a sense of the person you become? If that is
[Amit Varma]: something you can possibly nail down, like, you know, where do you begin to get the sense
[Amit Varma]: of I like these things? I like this kind of art. Oh, I like architecture and no one else
[Amit Varma]: does. And by the way, anyone listening to the episode so far would find you wonderfully
[Amit Varma]: sanskari because your two seminal moments as you describe them involve a temple and
[Guest]: a cow. So well done with that. That's why I always think about, as I mentioned to you
[Guest]: earlier, like, how does it feel to be on the other side of this and this side of this?
[Guest]: It's always there. I'll tell you a story and I'll answer that question. So I love my grandmother.
[Guest]: She's dead now. Of course, I'm 55. So she has to be dead. She's not going to be alive.
[Guest]: So they make pickles in Andhra and pickles get old. And every year you make pickles.
[Guest]: And then they cook lots of rice because in a household full of this many people, you
[Guest]: have to cook a large quantity of rice. So leftover rice is kept in a terracotta pot
[Guest]: outside the door because you can't touch it after you have, when you are cooking because
[Guest]: you have to be madi. Madi is this idea that you're ritually pure for cooking and for puja.
[Guest]: But people would come and she was in her own way attentive to their hunger. But in a way
[Guest]: that I find taught me so many things about cruelty. So they would take the rice out of
[Guest]: that pot. These are people who worked in the fields or around the house. And there would
[Guest]: be that old pickle. And she would have a jar of that old pickle. She would pull out the
[Guest]: old pickle. They would stand outside of the kitchen in the open area. And I happened to
[Guest]: be standing somewhere between my grandmother and this person I loved very much. I don't
[Guest]: remember who that person is. It was a man. And she pulled out the old pickle, not this
[Guest]: year's pickle, but the previous year. And she flicked it into his plate because she
[Guest]: can't touch his plate, that rice him. And at that moment, I remember very, very deeply
[Guest]: thinking about, am I him? Am I her? Who am I? Or am I that pickle? I don't think I invented
[Guest]: that way of looking. I think this comes back to what your question or your comment. I think
[Guest]: some things are given to you and you don't have choices. So I am a person who was given
[Guest]: this facility to notice things from a very early age. I don't remember never being a
[Guest]: person who didn't notice. And I notice people's emotions and feelings, things they're doing.
[Guest]: Not everything. I just notice, notice, notice. So if you're noticing all the time, even if
[Guest]: you don't notice everything, it's too much. There's no respite from noticing. So I've
[Guest]: always been the person that's taken breaks. And when I take a break, what do I do? I think
[Guest]: about what I noticed. So there is this capacity that developed in, I think, people who are
[Guest]: like us. That first time is the remembering, but the reflection on that process becomes
[Guest]: that. Now, this is not the experience of many people who've not grown up in large families
[Guest]: like I have, but I grew up in a very large family and we're a family that likes to remember
[Guest]: for each other. So if you have a memory and you share it with them and they not only remember,
[Guest]: so your memory's confirmed when you have that many people who are with you because you're
[Guest]: not the individual that's the capitalist individual or whatever you want to call it, like neoliberal
[Guest]: individual or whatever, but you are this individual of a certain moment of joint family modernity.
[Guest]: And they remember. So for example, my Masi, who I adore and is now 70, told me the other
[Guest]: day that one day she saw this blue thing in the doorway in my grandparents' house, and
[Guest]: it was coming from the well where clothes were washed and baths were taken. And what
[Guest]: was it? I was maybe three. I had taken all of that robin blue and applied it all over
[Guest]: myself, every part that I could reach. Another time, we have this tradition of painting yellow
[Guest]: and turmeric. It should be turmeric and kumkum, but it's yellow and red paint. I was so fascinated
[Guest]: by the yellow paint that I applied it all over myself as a little person. I am to this
[Guest]: day deeply, deeply, deeply interested in color. So when somebody criticizes me or challenges
[Guest]: me about something, I have to say, okay, I was formed this way because of this background,
[Guest]: but I also know that some things just were there. Like for example, there's color exoticism
[Guest]: about India, constant fetishization of India through its colors. But as a child, I don't
[Guest]: remember a moment not being particularly interested in the density of looking at a color, the
[Guest]: blackness of kajal, which we made at home, or the depth of the blue in that packet, or
[Guest]: the yellow color that it's being painted. My grandmother also pounded haldi sticks with
[Guest]: lime to make it into kumkum in my grandparents' house, mortar and pestle. So the transformation
[Guest]: of the yellow haldi and the white of the lime into this kumkum, there's this constant sort
[Guest]: of thing. So memory, I think, works differently for people who come from different time periods
[Guest]: and different social experiences. So in my understanding, memory for me is inseparable
[Guest]: from having a huge number of people reiterate a memory, an event, a set of emotions, not
[Guest]: the same emotions as mine, but some emotions. And in a way, sometimes I think about this,
[Guest]: I know I'm an individual and I'm such a very much a person in myself, but there are moments
[Guest]: where you feel like, where do I begin in this story? And where do they begin? Where do they
[Guest]: end? And I don't have any anxiety about that. I think that subjectivity doesn't always need
[Guest]: to be in a subject solely. It can be dispersed and crystallized at a certain moment when
[Guest]: a story is told, when an event is recounted. Oh, Poorna is always like this. I'm called
[Guest]: Poorna Bhavani at home. So she's always like this. She loves color and whatever. So these
[Guest]: are things I think could also work where you could have the remembering the first time
[Guest]: you remember, then the remembering the remembering, but then the other people around you. And
[Guest]: this is the beauty of having some sort of continuity in social structures. And it could
[Guest]: also be the terror of them. Maybe people need to forget many things in order to evolve better.
[Guest]: And I have chosen to forget things too. I have chosen to rebel. So in a society, in
[Guest]: a world in which forgetting was instrumental and remembering was both instrumental and
[Guest]: affectionate or a sense of insult, this is all there. But this is the world I was given.
[Guest]: So I have to learn to be fond of it and to have some distance from it and all those sort
[Guest]: of things, right? So I think that it can also be the first time it happens, then the remembering
[Guest]: of that remembering, and then also this understanding that there's a lot of people around you at
[Guest]: certain moments who was around you to remember. I had a very similar experience at grad school
[Guest]: in Columbia. When my beloved friends from grad school, we all sit together, there's
[Guest]: some crystal clear memories for us. And we keep ourselves attached to the freshness of
[Guest]: that moment of coming to Columbia University as graduate students by recounting certain
[Guest]: stories like my best friend, Deborah Diamond, and I were in Sanskrit class together. And
[Guest]: we happened to be joking about Sanskrit, making Sanskrit jokes. It's part of being a geek.
[Guest]: And she would say things like, bhoga, bhoga, bhoga, like when you were really into eating
[Guest]: whatever you're eating or whatever. Or we would have these funny ideas of, we were reading
[Guest]: some Puranic stuff and of having swimming toys where you would have Ananta as the floating
[Guest]: swimming toy. And then you would be, Lakshmi or Vishnu floating on it and he would be in
[Guest]: the middle of a swimming pool. All these like weird jokes, which probably aren't funny to
[Guest]: anybody else. But the memory of us making these jokes in front of, I think it was near
[Guest]: the Frick Library and Museum in Manhattan. It's so, hmm. I think, I think things work
[Guest]: like that sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And one of the memories from what you're recounting, you know, you speak about forgetting
[Amit Varma]: is being instrumental sometimes and important sometimes and you need to do it and you speak
[Amit Varma]: about remembering being instrumental and also, you know, affectionate, like, you know, your
[Amit Varma]: college memories, for example. And it's, and this interesting memory of the pickle being
[Amit Varma]: flicked across, right? Seems to me to be in the category of the sort of memory you maybe
[Amit Varma]: want to forget, but you remember it is clearly vivid for you. I mean, you notice stuff, right?
[Amit Varma]: But the next step after noticing is at some point in time, you look back and you begin
[Amit Varma]: to make sense of it. Like initially, I get that instinctive revulsion that someone you
[Amit Varma]: love is being treated like this by someone you love. And you may not at that point, if
[Amit Varma]: you're a little child understand any more of it than that. But later on, you kind of,
[Amit Varma]: I suppose, begin to sort it out. I mean, your grandfather having broad shoulders in the
[Amit Varma]: way that he did is a formulation that would have come upon you later. So tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about how beyond this whole visceral taking in of everything that is happening and the
[Amit Varma]: instinctive responses to that, you know, how do you start thinking about this stuff? How
[Amit Varma]: do you start making sense of the world? Like, one of the dangers for many young people is
[Amit Varma]: that they find a particular way to look at the world, whether it's an ideology or points
[Amit Varma]: of views or whatever. And all of these simple narratives or ways of looking at the world
[Amit Varma]: can be so seductive that you just give in to them. And because, you know, it just works.
[Amit Varma]: They're also instrumental in a sense. Give me a sense of, you know, what was your journey
[Amit Varma]: like in that sense? Like, what were your years in America like? You know, is there a moment
[Amit Varma]: where the stark difference between where you are and where you came from kind of makes
[Amit Varma]: you think and starts, you know, starts shaping your memories even?
[Guest]: Well, you know, I actually think that children have a deep sense of justice. Deep, deep sense
[Guest]: of justice. And if you're growing up in a family like I did, other children will develop
[Guest]: it in a different way. You're constantly thinking about, for example, I'm fair-skinned. There
[Guest]: are many fair-skinned people in my family. I'm sure there was some deep cross-pollination
[Guest]: that they have conveniently forgotten, instrumentally forgotten. Much fairer people than I. And
[Guest]: my grandmother favored me for that. Also, I was the second oldest girl. I was always
[Guest]: like smiling and happy kind of child, with them at least. And so, in her kitchen, she
[Guest]: would set out all the plates. Like, we were before, by 1975, there were 15 of us already
[Guest]: born. So, any meal would have a minimum of 15 people that she would have to cook for
[Guest]: and serve. So, you don't have to go elsewhere to understand justice, inequality, the dynamics
[Guest]: of human preference, and uncivility, unkindness. So, these 15 plates would be here. There are
[Guest]: many boys. She also had some favorites in her boys. There's no way you can love 15 people
[Guest]: all the same. That's not possible. So, she made this unbelievably delicious coconut chutney,
[Guest]: freshly ground in the mortar and pestle. Those coconuts, because there's so many people,
[Guest]: the coconuts were cracked by somebody else. They were chipped into smaller pieces. They
[Guest]: were put into the mortar and pestle, and then she would grind it with tamarind and all the
[Guest]: delicious spices. We all loved it. So, she would come by bent. She wouldn't haunch it.
[Guest]: She would bend, and she would serve each of us in the plate. Definitely, I got more. Definitely,
[Guest]: some of the boys that she liked got more. Then there were the girls, the other girls,
[Guest]: who were not as fair-skinned, also not as interested in her, didn't get. Now, whether
[Guest]: they were uninterested because she didn't extend herself to them, or that in 15 people
[Guest]: it's not possible for everybody to be, I began to understand that I got a lot of favor because
[Guest]: of, at a very young age, you don't need to articulate it. I feel like you don't need
[Guest]: to articulate it. There's some sense of justice that comes around from the fight. Why did
[Guest]: you give so much to someone else? That fight is there. Or I would tell my male cousins,
[Guest]: so they would drag me. They wouldn't even put their damn coffee cup back in the sink.
[Guest]: I would say, I would feel that resentment, boiling resentment, like why do they get to
[Guest]: leave their cups there? This is at their house, not at my grandparents' house. You couldn't
[Guest]: do that there, but you would, this sort of thing. In my case, I violated a lot of the
[Guest]: boundaries they set. And I think children do this all the time. I would touch my grandmother
[Guest]: when she was muddy. I would go hug all the people that I loved and loved and loved and
[Guest]: hugged them. I would use really the worst curse words against my grandfather when he
[Guest]: took me around on his shoulders in the village, and he never stopped me. So if I look back,
[Guest]: I also understand this, this way, that yes, it's a deeply unfair world, but challenging
[Guest]: it doesn't mean that the people that are being challenged will necessarily react violently
[Guest]: to a child. Now, they might have reacted differently to another kind of person, but to a child,
[Guest]: I feel like children have an enormous capacity to challenge systems because they're just so unmade still.
[Guest]: There's so much in the process. So gradually, my grandmother shed most of these things over
[Guest]: her own lifetime. My grandfather, of course, operated in a different way. Many things took
[Guest]: decades to change. But you know, it's not like I didn't suffer. These families are really
[Guest]: hard because there's also sexual abuse. There's also having you sit outside every time you
[Guest]: have period. Your first four days, you have your periods. There's enormous labor extracted
[Guest]: both from the boys and the girls in different shades because these are huge families. But
[Guest]: it depends also a lot. In my case, I've thought about all these things. I never feel victimized
[Guest]: by any of these experiences. Now I think of it in one way, but over my lifetime, they've
[Guest]: just felt like things that make me cry sometimes, but things that also teach me much more than
[Guest]: they make me cry. So I'll tell you about America in a second. I didn't see the system in America
[Guest]: being vastly fair. But today, I think about all that has happened as material, like clay
[Guest]: material. You have material to work with. Every day, it's an aesthetic commitment to
[Guest]: work with that material. It is an ethical commitment to work with that material, and
[Guest]: that material accrues more material. This is more material. I'm going to reflect on
[Guest]: this a lot when I leave this studio. We have some sort of responsibility to make ourselves
[Guest]: agentive in relationship to the material that life gives you. We become agentive in one
[Guest]: way or another, no matter where we come from. Now, there are always socially, politically
[Guest]: made ways to rob you of that sense of agency, and that's a responsibility, collective responsibility,
[Guest]: that we have to each other to foster a sense of... Agency doesn't mean rights, rights,
[Guest]: it doesn't mean responsibilities. It's a sense of consciousness. It's a sense of capacity.
[Guest]: When I moved to the United States, it was in 1975. The civil rights movement had ended.
[Guest]: The hippie movement, the 1968 struggle at Berkeley had also finished. The Vietnam War
[Guest]: had come to an end. Richard Nixon had resigned. Gerald Ford had become the interim prime president
[Guest]: of the United States. I arrived there on, I think somewhere close to January 26th, maybe
[Guest]: January 26th, which is odd, 1975. I remember coming from the airport, JFK, to New Jersey,
[Guest]: to Elizabeth, New Jersey, where my parents were living at that time. Elizabeth, New Jersey
[Guest]: is an industrial town. The Anheuser-Busch factory is there, and many other, it's a port,
[Guest]: so it's stinky. So, on the way, you see a lot of lights on the highway, and I would
[Guest]: see these signs like, Washa Rama, something Rama. And I thought, oh, this place won't
[Guest]: be so bad, they like our god. And this is, the Rama of my childhood is a storybook Rama.
[Guest]: He's not so much a god Rama, he's a storybook Rama. He's the stories that we read in Amar
[Guest]: Chitra Katha, or Chandamama, or my parents. My parents weren't very into storytelling,
[Guest]: but somebody would be telling some story. Or there would be in films, that was primarily
[Guest]: where I, N. T. Ramana acting as Rama. So, I thought, this place won't be so bad. I did
[Guest]: not want to leave my grandparents. I adored my life in India, loved it. And we go there,
[Guest]: and I said, okay, this won't be so bad. Later on, like 30 years later, my friend in graduate
[Guest]: school told me, that's because Panorama was so interesting and new then, that's why people
[Guest]: started naming, oh, Rama, to all these non-cinematic things. Like the way that.com became the
[Guest]: name after a point for so many. And I really think that, and then we went to school, the
[Guest]: next day, my father put me in school, and they changed my name from Annapurna to Anna,
[Guest]: because those were the years of assimilation. And they were not being unkind. This was the
[Guest]: way they thought they were being gracious. My father, we would go to the city regularly,
[Guest]: because you have to remember, these were the years when the great concerts were happening
[Guest]: at Carnegie Hall with M. S. Subbalakshmi, or whoever, all these great people are coming.
[Guest]: So we would drive from New Jersey and go. And if you park, you have to park on the street
[Guest]: there. And this was the deep, bad years of New York City, when it was crime-ridden and
[Guest]: people were scared of the city and lots of drugs and whatnot. And he would see an African-American
[Guest]: man walking, and he would park the car somewhere else. And I'm sitting in the backseat looking
[Guest]: at all this happening, I'm nine years old, and I'm thinking, he doesn't look that different
[Guest]: from us in terms of skin color. And why is Nana doing this? Like, Dad was fair-skinned,
[Guest]: but not in any way that was so hugely different from many African-American people, who are
[Guest]: actually at least 33%, according to statistics, the last time I read them, were of European
[Guest]: origin descent. So also, if you grow up, because anyway, I was an only child when I went there,
[Guest]: my company was the radio. And I'm very grateful to be on a podcast, because I love, I think
[Guest]: my love of listening comes from being such a radio person. I listened to the great music
[Guest]: of American soul, right? Like soul music, like people like Aretha Franklin and the guy
[Guest]: who sang Sitting in the Morning Sun, Marvin Gaye, sitting in the... Yeah, anyway, all
[Guest]: these beautiful, beautiful music, Donna Summer, the disco period, and all these people. And
[Guest]: I didn't really identify so much with white culture. Now, I'm not saying anything against
[Guest]: it or for it, I just didn't identify with it. Because you have to remember, in my school
[Guest]: in New Jersey, no kid had more than, nobody wore anything but jeans and a t-shirt to school.
[Guest]: We might have had three t-shirts and two pairs of jeans, one running shoe and one regular
[Guest]: shoe. Everybody wore sneakers. My best friend was Gina Conti, whose father was a pizza maker,
[Guest]: Italian descent pizza maker. I really think that the class divisions that exacerbated
[Guest]: the differences across race that we experienced more fully, and it's not that they didn't
[Guest]: exist then, but there was this little bit of flatness of social stratification. The
[Guest]: stratification wasn't so big in my school because it was largely poor and working class.
[Guest]: And not poor, I wouldn't say working class. I wouldn't call that poor. I would call it
[Guest]: working class. And then when we moved from there to Edison, New Jersey, which is now
[Guest]: a little bit climbing up the NRI ladder, then things changed again. There, my close friends
[Guest]: were a girl from a Korean migrant family and a Jewish girl, who was very, very Sherry Cantor
[Guest]: in Yeonhae Park. Very nice people. I didn't have any friends in school who were South
[Guest]: Asian, so I had to make friends. Not that I would have necessarily not made friends
[Guest]: with these people, because I'm generally a person who flows towards what I like. It doesn't
[Guest]: matter what it is. I think these things really taught me a lot. So if I imagine, like I have
[Guest]: one grandfather who's a Gandhian and he wove kadhi all his life. My grandfather of a certain
[Guest]: kind of social praxis of doing something at home to satisfy certain ancestral responsibilities
[Guest]: and familial responsibilities, and then the way that he was outside. I also have another
[Guest]: very rich, rich, rich family who was Brahmo partly near Rajahmundry. And then you come
[Guest]: to the United States and my father funded our arrival in the United States. He's a Brahmin,
[Guest]: working as a butcher at the nighttime as an engineer during the daytime and as a butcher
[Guest]: in Pathmark or some large grocery chain at supermarket, A&P, I don't remember which one.
[Guest]: And I was very aware of all these things, not in any ideological way, but just aware
[Guest]: that this is the material of my life. And my father didn't have, wasn't anti-beef. He
[Guest]: took me to Burger King and had me eat a burger and I couldn't eat it because it was too rich
[Guest]: for me and I couldn't stomach it. I'm not used, I wasn't used to it. But I had Subways
[Guest]: sometimes which were heroes, like they're called Sub, Submarine Sandwiches are heroes
[Guest]: and they had meat in it. All these things are like, what I find I think is the deepest
[Guest]: problem is there's a kind of dogma to how you're something now. Like if you are vegetarian,
[Guest]: you must be dogmatic about your vegetarianism. A friend of mine's grandmother, another Brahmin
[Guest]: family said, by the time you're dead, said to her, by the time you're dead, you'll have
[Guest]: eaten at least the elephant head size of non-vegetarian because every grain in India will have some
[Guest]: bug in it.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's a great way of putting it.
[Guest]: It's a great way of putting it because if you look at a rice grain, we all are consuming
[Guest]: this. But it's an orientation of how you structure your cooking and your eating and then it can
[Guest]: be just that. It can be, for example, sometimes I'm really troubled by industrialized chicken
[Guest]: farming. I just can't handle it. So I stop buying those eggs. I eat eggs from another
[Guest]: source. So this is, I think, answering the question in some way that you've asked, which
[Guest]: is I think what I learned from that time in America, and it was also you have to remember
[Guest]: the hippie culture had its, America lost the Vietnam War and it had a terrible moral, terribly
[Guest]: beautiful moral self-examination over the Vietnam War. I was witness to that. I understood
[Guest]: that a society could collectively do something really wrong and also could collectively negotiate
[Guest]: the wrongdoing to understand something about it. I still don't agree with the way the major
[Guest]: American media and pop culture and whatnot portray its relationships either to internal
[Guest]: communities or to other countries, but I did see this. I did see the end of the Watergate
[Guest]: and I did see this. And I wrote to Gerald Ford when I was nine saying I'd like to thank
[Guest]: you from school. I wrote to it, but actually I wrote to Jimmy Carter saying, may I come
[Guest]: and work for your campaign? Because he was a peanut farmer and I was quite charmed by
[Guest]: it. Farming felt familiar, of course. And so there was these, I think there are things
[Guest]: like that. I think there, I feel like one of the big rich things of my life is my parents
[Guest]: were so neglectful that no one ever told me, think this, think that, do this, do that.
[Guest]: And if my grandmother said, don't touch me, I'm muddy now. And I touched her, she'd just
[Guest]: go take another bath. There was no severe retribution from them. I faced a lot of, I
[Guest]: don't want to talk about it too much because it's boring, but abuse from my parents. So
[Guest]: I understood that you just have to be aware to your own life and have it available to
[Guest]: you. I think that's really important. It's your life, not yours only. It's the life that
[Guest]: the universe has given you and you have to be aware and present to it. It's giving you
[Guest]: that same thing. You don't need to go have 20 million new experiences to learn. Every
[Guest]: time I reflect on somebody talking to me, making that eye to me, oh, you're not ordering
[Guest]: anything non-vegetarian. You're ticking off the choice vegetarian when you have to select.
[Guest]: Sometimes I get that reaction and I'm sure I'm not the only one. And I think to myself,
[Guest]: well, you'll find out more about me. I won't give them, I won't give the situation the
[Guest]: power to limit the horizons of how I'm to be known by someone. But that's something
[Guest]: that I think if you've lived in a very diverse way that I feel like I have, you understand
[Guest]: something like that. Maybe that's what I've understood.
[Amit Varma]: So before I go on to my next question, a couple of observations. And the first one is a disagreement
[Amit Varma]: and the possible reason for this disagreement might be that you're a good person and I'm
[Amit Varma]: not such a good person. But I disagreed with what you said about kids having an inherent
[Amit Varma]: sense of fairness. Like I think of kids much more in a lot of the fly's way. And you know,
[Amit Varma]: you look at the child armies of East Timor or Sierra Leone and whatever, what's going
[Amit Varma]: on and what has happened in West Africa. You look at how kids can often act in incredibly
[Amit Varma]: brutal ways that are inexplicable. Like even in the Nirbhaya rape case, for example, the
[Amit Varma]: most brutal of them was really a kid. And Robert Sapolsky, the biologist has written
[Amit Varma]: eloquently about how especially with boys, the brain stops, completes its development,
[Amit Varma]: not stops, completes its development when men reach 25. Because that's when they get
[Amit Varma]: fully socialized, which is why there is so much violence among, you know, teenagers and
[Amit Varma]: young men and all of that. But anyway, that aside, I'd like to say something to that.
[Guest]: Please do. Yeah. I do believe children have an inherent sense of justice. They also are
[Guest]: deeply unjust. They are deeply unjust. So they understand what is, it's unjust, but
[Guest]: they do it anyway. So they're sociopaths. No, I don't know about that. My thinking isn't
[Guest]: so far along. But I do know that in my own life and what I've observed, children can
[Guest]: be very unjust and that puts an enormous collective responsibility on having life, not telling
[Guest]: how to be just, but showing how to be just. So may I give you some examples? Please, please.
[Guest]: So my uncle who brought me the record player and the cod liver oil tablets, he also bought
[Guest]: me a doll from England and it was white. And I took it with me and it was a tall doll.
[Guest]: And I took it with me to my village. My grandfather saw this doll. Now, if you say, is my grandfather
[Guest]: like a deep anti-colonial person or something? No. But he looked at that doll and he said
[Guest]: to me, understand that I'm maybe four at this point, maybe three or four. He said to me,
[Guest]: looking at this doll every day will make you think poorly of yourself. Something like that
[Guest]: will make you self-conscious because it was a white doll. And he threw it into the attic.
[Guest]: I'm sure it's still there in that building. The way that he thought about money, he earned
[Guest]: a lot of money, but he gave away vast amounts of money to the point that it was penury at
[Guest]: the end of his life. Though two districts shut down when he died for two days, there
[Guest]: was no money left. So everything had to be sold because he gave away money to so many
[Guest]: people. And he wanted to, he was fascinated by modernity. So he gave his daughter's education,
[Guest]: he bought a Chevrolet, he swam, he had these kinds of things. He also finally decided to
[Guest]: fight in elections. And this was not a smart thing for him to do. There was no way to win
[Guest]: elections because the tides were turning of the demographics of who could win elections
[Guest]: in that area. And I think back and I think like, I watched people like this. When my
[Guest]: mother was deeply abusive towards me, my mother and my father, my aunt stepped in and took
[Guest]: over the role of being a mother. At school, you would observe, like I went to a Carmelite
[Guest]: convent in Bhopal, and Carmelites can be very stern and they have a lot of physical punishment,
[Guest]: like scales on the knuckles and all these kinds of things. I think children in that
[Guest]: space were deeply aware. They were mean, but they were also aware that this was unfair.
[Guest]: Now how does this all get settled into something like being a good person and something like
[Guest]: being a sociopath? I think it takes a lot more than that. But I do think children have
[Guest]: both a sense of justice as well, a fairness, and a sense of cruelty. Both exist. They're
[Guest]: fully human people. They have all their emotions. I think that it does take a lot, like when
[Guest]: I was in New Jersey, my school, Mrs. Mayofsky, who was just the most delightful, wonderful
[Guest]: teacher in third grade, we had cooking class. We made cook two days a week in class, and
[Guest]: we fed each other. This was just simple things. Made popcorn and boiled something, I don't
[Guest]: know, something. I was always good at school, so I finished school, finished my work in
[Guest]: class, and I would help others. So she told me a couple of times to sit back, but then
[Guest]: she put it in my report card that Annapurna is very smart, and she works hard, but she
[Guest]: should learn to not help other people and sit in her chair when her work is done. And
[Guest]: I feel like these are really beautiful things, what she taught about me, that don't make
[Guest]: people dependent on you. It took me decades to learn that fully. Decades. I don't talk
[Guest]: nearly the way I used to talk before. I've found real plenitude in silence. But in those
[Guest]: years, I was like an electrical plug that could plug into many different sockets. And
[Guest]: I think these things, there's a responsibility. People like those children, child soldiers,
[Guest]: don't become cruel just like that. And it's just because they're children doesn't mean
[Guest]: that they don't have that cup. That's why we have to be so good to children. We have
[Guest]: an enormous responsibility to be good to them. Not good like pampering them with silly chocolates
[Guest]: and games and stuff, but take their moral, emotional, sensual, aesthetic, intellectual
[Guest]: needs seriously. Commit to them. Otherwise, you have delinquents. You have sad, depressed
[Guest]: people. And again, these things can also be biological. Some things just come. My father
[Guest]: is like a totally bad person. I know that. I'm not sure I'm supposed to say stuff like
[Guest]: that in a podcast, but everything that we know about him from all our families is that
[Guest]: he was very, very, he had tremendous capacity for cruelty in a family that doesn't have
[Guest]: that kind of thing. But he also had some really beautiful qualities. Once I asked a friend
[Guest]: of mine who loves to listen to music, classical music, someone I knew, not a friend, someone
[Guest]: I knew well at one point, how is it that people who listen to such beautiful music can be
[Guest]: so cruel? And this was a reflection on my thinking about him, both him and my father.
[Guest]: I think I've read enough of meditations in novels and things about cruelty that sometimes
[Guest]: children are so beautiful. And for men, sometimes women are so, I don't know. People choose
[Guest]: to allow themselves to be provoked by certain things for good and for worse. Sometimes they
[Guest]: also have no choice about what provokes them. But then once you're provoked, you have a
[Guest]: responsibility to reflect on that provocation. How are you going to be managed? Are you going
[Guest]: to go and like, you feel really, really vulnerable. You feel disempowered. How are you going to
[Guest]: handle this situation? I remember when I was 10, my mother hadn't had my sister yet. And
[Guest]: there was a girl in my apartment complex in Edison, New Jersey. And I had gossiped about
[Guest]: her to other children. And her mother called me to their house, working class woman, I
[Guest]: think a single mother. And she said, you shouldn't have done that. You shouldn't have spoken
[Guest]: about her like that to other people. You made her sad. You hurt her. I cannot believe what
[Guest]: a beautiful thing she did for me. There was another girl and her mother was also a single
[Guest]: mother. This is another experience I really thank America for, is the diversity of people
[Guest]: that I encountered there. Same thing I thank India for, just a different way. And my mother
[Guest]: was very hard on me. But Andrea, this woman, she was a single mother young. She was a very
[Guest]: nice mother to her daughter who was younger than me. And she happened to be reading Khalil
[Guest]: Gibran, a passage about children and them being arrows you shoot into the air. And she
[Guest]: gave me that. I borrowed the book from her and I read it to my mother. My mother was
[Guest]: so angry with me. I don't remember my mother being angry with nearly the same weight as
[Guest]: I remember Andrea giving me this book, Khalil Gibran, and introducing me to a person who
[Guest]: reflects on such things. Oh, adults do this. Adults have thoughts about what is, they think
[Guest]: about having choices about what kind of parent to be. So I think it's very, very important
[Guest]: to take children's inner lives, social lives, intellectual lives, very, very seriously.
[Amit Varma]: So let's deviate from this so far sort of linear narrative of your life for a moment
[Amit Varma]: and I'll digress and just ask a question that comes to mind. One, I agree with you. I think
[Amit Varma]: we're all as human beings hardwired for all kinds of different contradictory things. We
[Amit Varma]: are wired for empathy. We are also wired in a sense for selfishness and the cruelty that
[Amit Varma]: it leads to. And you know, I love Steven Pinker's quote on this, where he says, nature gives
[Amit Varma]: you knobs, nurture turns them. And perhaps, you know, someone like you might have a bigger
[Amit Varma]: empathy knob, and you know, you just need to turn it a little and some people have a
[Amit Varma]: much smaller knob and so on. And Pinker in his book, The Better Angels of Our Nature
[Amit Varma]: also makes a point about the importance of literature. Like you spoke about, you used
[Amit Varma]: an interesting phrase where you said, it is our responsibility to reflect. And now I'm
[Amit Varma]: thinking how do most people even get the tools to be reflective? And one way of doing so,
[Amit Varma]: which is Pinker's point, is that every time you read a novel, you enter someone else's
[Amit Varma]: head. You know, you are given one life to live, which is the one you're born into. But
[Amit Varma]: you live many lives when you read books, when you enter the lives of others, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And that can kind of build empathy that can build a sort of both a terror and an ability
[Amit Varma]: to sort of step back and, you know, look at the world. Now, on the one hand, you just
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how, how can someone who listens to such grand music be such a monster? And
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure many monsters listen to grand music. But is do you feel that there is something
[Amit Varma]: to that, that the appreciation for art, like especially in India, I think anyone who appreciates
[Amit Varma]: in a mindful way, our art or our cuisine or anything, even the way we dress is less likely
[Amit Varma]: to be bigoted because you would obviously understand that it comes from everywhere.
[Guest]: So I would like to say that this is what I mean when I say spaces to construct spaces
[Guest]: to reflect for children. But I think we need to continuously do this all our lives, right?
[Guest]: So for me, art, all of life is a space to reflect. One facet of like post-Renaissance,
[Guest]: post-Enlightenment ideological formation of human beings is to say that literature is
[Guest]: the highest art, because as I mentioned the other day that Norman Rush had said that,
[Guest]: you know, after the Bible, it's the novel, that literature is the highest art. But I
[Guest]: think all different ways, spaces, all different moments, all different things that cause you
[Guest]: to stop and reflect and are designed to make people stop and reflect are important. So
[Guest]: when I was younger, I don't feel I'm being linear. For me, all time is always unfolding
[Guest]: on each other, right? So this movie called Mamta came out, and it has two or three beautiful
[Guest]: songs in it. And one of them is Rahe Na Rahe Hum, or Rehte Te Kabhi, I think Rehte Te Kabhi,
[Guest]: Is Kooje Mein Angaaron Ki Tarha. It's a beautiful, beautiful song. I knew what it meant, that
[Guest]: song, for a small child to see that movie, I knew, I saw it not when it was released,
[Guest]: but just a few years later, maybe I was eight, nine, one of my Friday nights with my mother
[Guest]: watching movies things. I knew that what he was communicating is what is the responsibility
[Guest]: of a man to a woman that has been wronged by society that he loves, and how does one
[Guest]: come, and then there's another beautiful song in there, Chhoopalo Yoon Dil Lo Diye Ki Tarha
[Guest]: Kandir Mein, something like that. It'll come to me, I'm a little nervous. Usually I remember
[Guest]: all the lyrics. So what is the responsibility? The same question I had when I watched Amar
[Guest]: Prem with Rajesh Khanna and Sharmila Tagore. These are popular cinema, but when he goes
[Guest]: into Kuch Toh Log Kahenge Logon Ka Kaam Hai Kahna, why can't that be a moment for anyone
[Guest]: to sit back and reflect? He says this, and I'm speaking this because I'm a woman. These
[Guest]: were the first understandings of myself as a feminist. I am a feminist, and I think it's
[Guest]: one of the most sensuous and intellectually interesting things to be, is how do you look
[Guest]: at the world from this, calling yourself a feminist, what does it mean to make the world
[Guest]: in front of you, inside of you, day in and day out? So these are the beginnings of speculating
[Guest]: on what is the responsibility for a man who understands, not reviles a woman, but understands
[Guest]: a woman. We know about men who revile, but there are also men, I know there are men,
[Guest]: I know many of them personally, who understand women. All these novels, one of the biggest
[Guest]: things that formed me were biographies. So when I was very little, I was always a very
[Guest]: devout reader, so the new books would come to the school library in New Jersey, wherever
[Guest]: I went to school. The librarians were my best friends. They would keep the new books before
[Guest]: they were catalogued for me on Friday. I would take them home, devour them, and bring them
[Guest]: back. So the things that I took a lot were, among the witchcraft and sorcery books, were
[Guest]: biographies of people. So biographies of Clara Barton, Florence Nightingale, Margaret
[Guest]: Mead, so many different people. And I really, really think that today, if I say to my daughter,
[Guest]: you must learn everything you need to know from a book to reflect, it won't work. That
[Guest]: was possible at a moment, like when I was 15 and I was staying in my grandparents' house
[Guest]: for six months, I discovered in a cabinet small bound copies of so many Shakespeare
[Guest]: plays. I read them continuously, like reading Cornelius Rex continuously. Who does that?
[Guest]: But it changes you to do these sort of things. I feel like literature isn't the only thing.
[Guest]: I feel like art and literature are very important, formalized spaces for such things. But so many
[Guest]: people who make really beautiful art are so fucking corrupt, you know, and so disdainful
[Guest]: of the internal complexities and unfairnesses in their own work. So I feel very strongly
[Guest]: that everything in life has to be seen, not in a pressuresome way, but as you have to
[Guest]: be so open that you are receiving whatever it has to give you. A friend of mine who's
[Guest]: from Kerala, and he is my friend, once told me not so long ago, we were talking, and this
[Guest]: was my first understanding of the reading culture in Kerala and the way that the government
[Guest]: press publishes, you know, the Sahitya Akademi or whatever, the Kerala Academy, Sahitya Akademi
[Guest]: publishes so many books and then there's a contract to send them to school libraries
[Guest]: and there's a ready-made population to buy books there, institutional purchasing. So
[Guest]: I said, oh, that's really interesting. And I hadn't arrived at good yet because I was
[Guest]: still absorbing that this thing could happen that way. And he said to me, and then I asked
[Guest]: him, do you like to read? And he said, I read, but I don't read so much. And I said, ah.
[Guest]: And then he felt like he had to explain himself. He said, because reading can be corrupting
[Guest]: too. And I totally agree with that because I think people think that they're becoming
[Guest]: something by being well-read, but that's not true. I have a friend, another friend, Jeebesh
[Guest]: Bhakchi, who I sit sometimes and talk things over with. He's part of an artist collective.
[Guest]: And one day he said that when he sometimes when he works with young people, he gives
[Guest]: them one book and he asked them to read it for like three months or something. Really,
[Guest]: really well. That's enough. And if we understand book production and marketing itself to be
[Guest]: such a corrupt process, which it is, then how can we expect the books to deliver on
[Guest]: goodness all the time? I think that a moral, no, an ethical engagement with life means
[Guest]: that you have to keep sifting. That's your labor. There's no fixed place you can moor
[Guest]: yourself to because the world is so dynamic. You are dynamic. The world, you are part of
[Guest]: the world. So it's nice to think that literature will deliver us. It's nice to think that listening
[Guest]: to good music will deliver us. It can teach us many, many things. But as far as I can
[Guest]: see, most people seem to be satisfied with getting a little bit new, but mostly what
[Amit Varma]: they're familiar with. I was struck by your phrase earlier, by the way, which you used
[Amit Varma]: to describe your father, but it's also useful in a metaphorical way where you said he was
[Amit Varma]: an in America, he was an engineer by day, a butcher by night. And I wonder if that applies
[Amit Varma]: to other things. Tell me now, you know, sort of going back to your life story. And I also
[Amit Varma]: agree with you that, you know, looking at it in a linear way is sometimes a problem
[Amit Varma]: because there is just the present moment and all our memories are also in the now and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. Tell me about how your sort of sense of self began to form in the sense that like
[Amit Varma]: I just look back on my own life and many of my guests have also shared this that I look
[Amit Varma]: back on my own life and my sense of self was very flawed. I am a completely different person
[Amit Varma]: from what I was at 25, completely different. And it just changed, right? And over time,
[Amit Varma]: you kind of reflect and maybe you're lucky enough to have the opportunity to be able
[Amit Varma]: to take a step back and reflect on that stuff and change. How did your sense of self evolve?
[Amit Varma]: You know, a lot of this is impressionistic stuff that you are doing a lot of noticing,
[Amit Varma]: you notice the flicking of the pickle, you notice, you know, the doll being thrown away
[Amit Varma]: into the attic where it still lies, as you pointed out, and such an interesting image
[Amit Varma]: of dolls still lying in an attic, still pale after all these years.
[Guest]: Now, I want to say something to you. I know me and I know many people who have a pretty
[Guest]: solid sense of self from the time they're born.
[Guest]: I figured that. Yes. And I think the whole task of life is getting people out of the
[Guest]: way. And that's how I've lived my life. I put people in my way, for example, I worried
[Guest]: about my mother incessantly. I worried about people in my life incessantly, worried about
[Guest]: their well-being. And I thought myself as to be the person that worries for other people
[Guest]: and takes care of them. So I could watch a movie and there would be Ma, and I would say,
[Guest]: oh, I'm also like that Ma, because I know that feeling inside of me. But that's not
[Guest]: all that I am. I'm much more. So, you know, the person that wants to walk on the National
[Guest]: Highway at age three and doesn't feel any fear, the person, all these things are there.
[Guest]: The person that loves to read is very comfortable being in a room full of people and very comfortable
[Guest]: being solitary. This is all the self, no? So then there are people and situations that
[Guest]: are going to come and tell along, like, you're a woman, you shouldn't do this. Why? So when
[Guest]: I was 25, 27, 25, at various stages in my life, I did something that I'm not supposed
[Guest]: to do because not to rebel. I don't think I was rebellious. Just to say, oh, this feels
[Guest]: correct. I need to acknowledge this. So, you know, in my family, they're overly protective
[Guest]: of girls in the wrong way. And then, of course, also sexually abusing of girls. They're always
[Guest]: those relatives, too, in a large family. When I was 27, I bought an Indrail Pass. This is
[Guest]: in 1993. And I traveled all across India in a train by myself wearing a sari. Because
[Guest]: the other thing that people would say is that, how can you wear a sari and do things? I said,
[Guest]: well, women are having babies, working in the fields. There's this beautiful photograph
[Guest]: of the Sri Lankan architect Manetta Silva climbing up a ladder to inspect a construction
[Guest]: site in a sari. I said, nope, I'm going to wear a sari and I'm going to travel. Of course,
[Guest]: I wore some shalwar kameez as well. When I wore a sari at a suitcase, I would bathe with
[Guest]: the Bisleri bottle or whatever it was, that yes, or some bottle in the bathrooms in the
[Guest]: train. I'd fill it up and I would take a bath every six, seven places. I would spend the
[Guest]: night at a good place, get laundry done. I would sleep at train stations. This is 1993,
[Guest]: just two years after liberalization of the economy. I understood that maybe my family
[Guest]: was much more space, was much more dangerous for me than India was, the rest of India was.
[Guest]: That's what I understood as a woman. People were, except for one tiny incident in my life
[Guest]: in those years of traveling to Patna and facing something there from men on Diwali night.
[Guest]: A very nice Muslim family group of women just kind of surrounded me and they were wearing
[Guest]: burqas. So they surrounded me and kind of just kept those men away. I never faced any
[Guest]: issues. I'm not saying people don't face issues. I'm just saying that things, you have to keep
[Guest]: working to get to yourself. Again, it's work. You have to do the work. I think I was given
[Guest]: something at birth, whatever you want to call it, genes, karma, all these things. And then
[Guest]: I have a responsibility and I felt it very sincerely because there was joy in it. Like
[Guest]: I'm listening to the Beatles and I said, this feels good to hear. Why? Let me hear it some
[Guest]: more because it's making me feel good. These are just simple things, but they're actually
[Guest]: really profound things. Like why do so many people, including me at moments, gravitate
[Guest]: to things which are bad, which make us feel so bad? I'm not talking about the hard work
[Guest]: of like, let's say lifting a suitcase up the staircase or something like that. I'm talking
[Guest]: about things that really make you feel bad. Like, you know, you hate sucking up to people
[Guest]: at a party. Why are you sucking up to people then? Why are you doing it? Because you, what
[Guest]: is it that's supposed to, this is something we have to work at. It is our task. It is
[Amit Varma]: our responsibility. There's so many cinematic images in everything
[Amit Varma]: you're saying, like a little child painting herself red or these women in a burqa just
[Amit Varma]: surrounding you. And I can just imagine the camera moving as it should. Someone should
[Amit Varma]: make a web series from your memories, perhaps. So what did you want to do then? Let me get
[Amit Varma]: to the mundane, concrete question of, you know, rather than going to these abstractions
[Amit Varma]: like sense of self and all of that, which is always a continuously evolving thing and
[Amit Varma]: also a fixed thing, like you pointed out, if you had a strong sense of self from when
[Amit Varma]: you were young. But what did you want to do? What were you educated in? And what did you
[Guest]: see yourself doing for the rest of your life? I was good at school. And I wasn't a science
[Guest]: child or a literature child or a social studies child or whatever. I just was good at school
[Guest]: and loved to read. And I love to read all kinds of things. Gravitated towards things
[Guest]: which were about people, like novels or biographies for my personal reading. I think somewhere
[Guest]: in there, as I mentioned earlier, I read some sort of book about Margaret Mead. I might
[Guest]: have seen Coming of Age in Samoa. And there was a radio show for the South Asian community
[Guest]: in America. And I was called as a group of young people. And they asked me, what did
[Guest]: you want to be? And I think I said fairly clearly. I'm pretty sure I said fairly clearly
[Guest]: I wanted to be an anthropologist. So by the time I had, I'm not that far from that now.
[Guest]: I'm an art historian. I work on architecture. I work on craft. I work on teaching, pedagogy.
[Guest]: These are the areas of research interest. So by the time I was 12, I have a scholarly
[Guest]: orientation. I know that. Now I'm very comfortable calling myself that. I always had this like
[Guest]: deeply sit down and delve into something mentality. That's the noticing comes from that. Sitting
[Guest]: down and do the work comes from that, that idea. I know there are many good people who
[Guest]: don't think like this and I love to listen to their ways of doing things. But this is
[Guest]: me. I sit down and I do this or I could stand up and do it. It doesn't have to be sitting
[Guest]: down. And there was a moment in my life where my parents wanted to get me married when I
[Guest]: was like 16 or 15, arranged marriage. And they tried all kinds of shenanigans and it
[Guest]: didn't work. And this, I went to high school in India. I did my 10th, 11th and 12th here.
[Guest]: PUC as they called it then. And in Hyderabad and Vishakhapatnam. And then I went back to
[Guest]: the US and my parents really wanted me to study business administration or something
[Guest]: like that then. It was so boring, man. It was so boring. And I went to this large commuter
[Guest]: university in Los Angeles and I went to art school partly because I think it was nearby
[Guest]: and partly because I liked it. And I was always a little maker. My mother taught me how to
[Guest]: sew falls and make samosas and kajas and these things and those things. From a generation
[Guest]: of women in India, you learn to make stuff. So I went there and I liked it. So I started
[Guest]: studying design. And I like design because it is something, you want something and you
[Guest]: have to sit down and work for it. You have to think about how to make it work. But you
[Guest]: have to remember this was the era, or you may or may not remember, but I think something
[Guest]: similar was happening here too. Just a little bit later where certain things like, you know,
[Guest]: that sun that came over Birla Sun Life or Bank of Baroda. These are motifs about an
[Guest]: economy rising. So when I went to undergraduate, Reagan had just been elected and there was
[Guest]: this idea of an economy in motion. So the swoop was very important. So every goddamn
[Guest]: thing from Vons to supermarket to this thing or that thing had the swoop. And I think there
[Guest]: was the moment where I thought, this is stupid. I mean, I can say those kinds of things, like
[Guest]: this is really inane and stupid. And I think we had some tasks to design a magazine cover.
[Guest]: I like that. I was the last batch of students that was not mandatorily learning computer-aided
[Guest]: design. I still hand cut all my letters and pasted them and used benzene to clean up the
[Guest]: thing and the chemicals really got to me. And the temporality of retail design is horrible.
[Guest]: You have to be awake whatever time to meet the deadlines. Part of the education there
[Guest]: was you had to take art history classes as part of your art degree. And my first art
[Guest]: history class, I was working three jobs and going to school full-time. My art history
[Guest]: class was at two in the afternoon after lunch. I would fall asleep and I failed. I didn't
[Guest]: even fail, I got a D. But I took more art history classes. And the next one, the next
[Guest]: one, I just loved it. I loved literature classes too, which was also there. I liked the philosophy
[Guest]: classes. I love philosophy. I mean, I read philosophy for fun in those years. And even
[Guest]: now, I love it. I love that somebody says, let's contemplate this thing called friendship.
[Guest]: And they spend 350 pages contemplating friendship. I love the idea that somebody says, let's
[Guest]: contemplate, what does it mean to print money? Money is a very philosophical thing. So let's
[Guest]: sit down and really reflect on this. I loved all this. And what I loved about art history
[Guest]: was it still was connected to the idea of anthropology about people, like viscerally
[Guest]: connected to people. People make things. But what I liked about it was that unlike literature,
[Guest]: it doesn't privilege an already privileged object, which is the printed text. So I was
[Guest]: aware that people who could read and write had more status in society and things which
[Guest]: were about reading and writing had more status. And I really wanted to spend time listening
[Guest]: to the things that objects said about people and about themselves. And gradually, I came
[Guest]: to understand that objects don't even say things about people. They say things about
[Guest]: material. And objects might say things about, might be designed to speak for themselves
[Guest]: too. And we can talk about that. And I was fascinated by that. So the turning moment
[Guest]: was I had a Japanese art history professor. It was a wonderful place because Los Angeles
[Guest]: has many museums and museum curators who are not in the topmost positions often teach as
[Guest]: adjunct faculty. So I had pre-Columbian. I had Korean. I had Chinese. I had Japanese.
[Guest]: I had, not Korean was part of this, Chinese and Japanese. I had the history of modern
[Guest]: design. I had Greek. I had Roman. I had modern art history. I had so much art history that
[Guest]: when I went to grad school, I realized that students who went to much more elite schools
[Guest]: didn't have this range. So the turning point for me was when I had a Japanese art history
[Guest]: teacher and Japanese people believe objects speak. They have this idea of mono no aware,
[Guest]: which is that there's a beauty of things. You have this sense that things are impermanent
[Guest]: and passing. And Japanese people have a sense of, and this is the irony that they became
[Guest]: such a great industrial giant later, but until modernity, they made objects in multiples,
[Guest]: like for example, massive numbers of teacups or whatever. But there was a sense that these
[Guest]: objects had to respond to the touch. They had to have a conversation. They had to respond
[Guest]: to the eye. And he allowed us, Joseph Newland, allowed us access to that world. He didn't
[Guest]: drum it into us, but he showed us objects in such a disciplined way. He taught us in
[Guest]: such a disciplined way to come to this. So he told us the story. I don't know if you're
[Guest]: aware of this. The Six Persimmons is a very famous painting. It's a very, very famous
[Guest]: painting. And he told us the story about this painting. And then he told me about his teacher
[Guest]: who was a Zen teacher and who had a Zen master as his teacher. So apparently he wanted to
[Guest]: see this very beautiful scroll or painting that was in this monastery. And the teacher
[Guest]: kept refusing to show it or kept putting it off, not refusing, putting it off. And then
[Guest]: one day, I think he went to the toilet and when he pulled out the toilet paper, there
[Guest]: was the painting on the roll. And I don't know in America of the 1980s anything else
[Guest]: that could have given me access to the weirdness of human existence, the weirdness and interesting.
[Guest]: This is other people that have had other experiences. This was my experience of how to understand
[Guest]: that there's just so many interesting ways of being in this world, living in this world
[Guest]: and teaching and all these kinds of things. And then I had another teacher for modern
[Guest]: art and she was very interesting because I was not a very good writer. I mean, she said,
[Guest]: I'm going to give you a D if you want to keep your paper this way. But if you want to improve
[Guest]: your writing, I will work with you till you get the grade you're satisfied with. So I
[Guest]: decided I would be satisfied with an A. So she worked with me and that was like a quantum
[Guest]: moment for me, transformation movement, to be really, really understand that if I spent
[Guest]: my time really delving into something and laboring, I would be able to do the things
[Guest]: I like doing, which is thinking and writing and making something. So that's it. So then
[Guest]: for me, art history continued to be very beautiful experience. And then I did well in my studies
[Guest]: in my undergraduate in spite of the Ds, they eventually put me, there were just moments
[Guest]: like it was like a, I don't know, whatever, building's Roman or whatever, you know, you
[Guest]: pass these things. And then I decided I wanted to go to grad school at Columbia and I was
[Guest]: accepted. I thought about going to baking school, Pillsbury baking school, because I
[Guest]: love to cook. And then I thought about studying folklore because that's also close to anthropology.
[Guest]: So Indiana University at Bloomington was very important school of folklore. I thought about
[Guest]: studying Japanese art history, but I did not want to, and I'd neither had the funds nor
[Guest]: had the ability to study Kanji for five years in order to master that. I thought about studying
[Guest]: African art, which I loved, loved, loved, loved. But I think I was still enamored with
[Guest]: the idea of having recorded voices, recorded documents about objects. And I didn't have
[Guest]: a very good deeper sense that records come in different forms and you can listen to objects
[Guest]: in different ways. So then South Asian art became the thing that I did, even though I
[Guest]: never studied it in my undergraduate. I fell in love with my teacher. The first time I
[Guest]: went to see her at Columbia before I started teaching, being a student there, and she was
[Guest]: one of the few South Asian women in the field. And she was outlined, there were this narrow
[Guest]: room, her office, and both sides were covered with books. She was sitting near the window.
[Guest]: It was July 29th or something like that in 1989. And I saw her and I said, it was love
[Guest]: at first sight. And I said, okay, I'm going to come and study here. And never did I imagine
[Guest]: myself becoming a professor, an academic. I'm very clear that being a scholar and being
[Guest]: an academic are different things. It's very important for me. Being a scholar, being an
[Guest]: intellectual, being an academic, they're different, different things. And they can all merge in
[Guest]: one person. They don't have to. I had choices. So my PhD from there became a beginning point
[Guest]: to a life, I think, which is so rewarding of work and thinking and doing. Yeah, that's
[Guest]: what I do. And I'm very grateful to my teachers who never said that your destiny is to be
[Guest]: this or that. I'm grooming you for this or that. My teacher Vidya Deheja was so generous
[Guest]: about letting me go. In between, I thought about becoming a doctor because I love medicine.
[Guest]: And I started doing some pre-med courses at Columbia. It was just too much. I couldn't
[Guest]: take the load of PhD core classes as well as pre-med classes. But yeah, so it's things
[Guest]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: So fascinating. And I'm very interested in what you said about the Japanese conception
[Amit Varma]: of objects being able to speak. Like, have you read this writer called Ken Liu? His surname
[Amit Varma]: is Liu, it's pronounced Liu, I think, who's written this beautiful book called Paper Menagerie.
[Amit Varma]: That's a title short story. And it's just incredible. And I don't want to give spoilers
[Amit Varma]: about it at all. But it's you will love it, I think. And I will post a link in my show
[Amit Varma]: notes for all the listeners to read.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for doing such things.
[Amit Varma]: I want to kind of double click on a few of the things you mentioned. And one of them
[Amit Varma]: is a difference between being a scholar and an academic. What is that difference? And
[Amit Varma]: why do you feel you're more of a scholar?
[Guest]: So I teach all the time and I'm a dedicated, I adore teaching. I adore it. I was blessed
[Guest]: with the most amazing teachers at every stage in my life. And if I am who I am, it is for
[Guest]: many reasons for my teachers. They're very close. So I love teaching. So teaching is
[Guest]: also not necessarily collapsible to being an academic. I think that academia is a model
[Guest]: that developed at a certain moment in time, certainly in post-independence India. And
[Guest]: as a model, it is changing rapidly. And there's a struggle over what its future is going to
[Guest]: be, whether it's in India or in the U.S., it's happening. And that's a good struggle.
[Guest]: Academia is the first place many people grate their teeth against politics, how to be political
[Guest]: in this world, how to be adult and how to be political. All these are very important.
[Guest]: But whether that actually, the structure of academia, whether it's in America where there's
[Guest]: constant pressure to produce research or writing or texts or something, the constant pressure
[Guest]: to be original, innovative, the new, or in India to be critical all the time. All of
[Guest]: these have now been completely absorbed into the educational industrial complex. Let's
[Guest]: be really clear about this. So in the educational industrial complex, where is the time to reflect?
[Guest]: And what is a scholar if not someone who labors and reflects? Labors in the archive, labors
[Guest]: with what they arrive at, discover, labors with the battling interpretations in their
[Guest]: own head, labors with acknowledging their debts to the past, their breaks with the past,
[Guest]: crafting ways of doing things which reflect this experience of engagement, which are imaginative.
[Guest]: If you read people like David Shulman or Velcher Narendra or this wonderful new scholar, new
[Guest]: for me, Arik Moran, who has been working on Himachal and the queens of Himachal, the Pahari
[Guest]: queens during the British era. These things take time. They take time and they take time
[Guest]: not because you spent hours looking at the computer screen, but they take time to...
[Guest]: Sometimes I read, read, read, research, research, research, visit temples, temples, temples,
[Guest]: and suddenly this essay of 5,000 words comes out over two, three weeks very cogently and
[Guest]: lucidly. Now, are you saying that it only took me two or three weeks to write something
[Guest]: or did it actually take years of preparing and doing and preparing and doing? Where is
[Guest]: that time? And then if you're funded in a certain way, as far as I know, many of the
[Guest]: people who are at a certain stage in their career, they are constantly battling for grants.
[Guest]: They're constantly applying for job talks or conference papers or this. And some of
[Guest]: it's very productive and very generative, but a lot of it is just getting in the way
[Guest]: of being scholarly. And why is being scholarly important? That's the next question we have
[Guest]: to ask. Because being a scholar respects learning, the process of learning. It really respects
[Guest]: the process of learning. Now, how you represent that process is very much in your hands to
[Guest]: some extent. Is it a book? Is it a podcast? Is it the way you teach? Is it the way you
[Guest]: treat buildings in a policy discussion? And being a scholar means that you're willing
[Guest]: to go back to beginner's mind on a regular basis. And to me, that's very different from
[Guest]: the intense pressure to have certitude that academia puts on people. I am not interested
[Guest]: in so much in certitudes because the fun is over. And then teaching is very different.
[Guest]: Teaching is a real commitment. Like I have students who have been my students for 20
[Guest]: years. I spend a lot of time with students and the fruit of that labor of teaching for
[Guest]: them and for you happens over a long time. And there's nothing as rewarding in work as
[Guest]: watching a book you've written make someone really happy or deep. Deep is more better
[Guest]: than happy. Or a student feel like they've arrived at something very profound for themselves.
[Guest]: It's really important. Yeah, I think that's the distinction. The distinction between industrialized
[Guest]: academic work is the production of certitude and scholarly work is the claiming of a beginner's
[Guest]: mind as a wonderful existential space.
[Amit Varma]: So is it then sort of fair to summarize this by saying that academics are forced onto these
[Amit Varma]: grooves. They have to go along those grooves and they have to keep moving all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And if you just talk of incentives, there are incentives that drive them towards all
[Amit Varma]: the time, publishing and producing and trying to be different. There might also be incentives
[Amit Varma]: that force them to conform to a certain way of thinking that might be fashionable within
[Amit Varma]: academia. Whereas if you're a scholar, those incentives don't exist. You are just in search
[Amit Varma]: of the truth in your own way, at your own speed. And that's what drives you. And would
[Guest]: that be a correct summation?
[Guest]: It's very stark the way you've painted it. But I am a person of my time. So there are
[Guest]: many, many academics who do wonderful work. My critique is more of academia than academics
[Guest]: in general. But I do feel that I pay attention to what they're saying because what they're
[Guest]: saying and how they're saying and where they're saying it is important to shaping the things,
[Guest]: the environment in which I'm saying things. So for example, I read a lot of things that
[Guest]: come out of university presses. Thank you, university presses. Right? I also think that
[Guest]: university presses will not be the only place I publish. So I don't publish only in university
[Guest]: presses. I write in different avenues because I want different kinds of audiences. Even
[Guest]: my engagement with the JCB prize was for me to come out of one space and enter another
[Guest]: space. Right? All these things are really, really important. Yeah. I think being a scholar
[Guest]: is a deeply romantic space that you must allow yourself to have. It's deeply romantic. The
[Guest]: romance of reading something late into the night or getting up very early and writing,
[Guest]: of being very thrilled to connect to. So I work on medieval material, or I work on like
[Guest]: that essay I sent to you, one of the founders of the Indian studio pottery movement. These
[Guest]: are people that existed before my time. But if I give myself the time and the space and
[Guest]: I'm observing myself, I'm observing what I'm reading, I'm observing the things they've
[Guest]: made. I'm reading other people's writing on Japanese studio pottery or something or something
[Guest]: or something. Something happens. Something happens. And that something happening takes
[Guest]: time and space. I want to see an academia that promotes that. I'm not sure that that's
[Amit Varma]: where academia is headed right now. So we are headed now for a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And when we come back, I have lots more to ask you and lots more to double click on from
[Amit Varma]: what you already mentioned. One of the things I've learned most over the last year and a
[Amit Varma]: half is sharing my insights on my two greatest passions, writing and podcasting. And I'd
[Amit Varma]: love to invite you to be a part of this journey. Registration is now open for the January cohort
[Amit Varma]: of the art of clear writing, where over four webinars on four Saturdays, I teach all I
[Amit Varma]: know about the art and craft of writing compelling prose, much interaction, many exercises. And
[Amit Varma]: at the end of it, you get to join the clear writing community and online community formed
[Amit Varma]: by the 18 previous cohorts of this course. In that community, we have book clubs, workshops,
[Amit Varma]: writing prompts with feedback and much else. I am also doing a special cohort of my podcasting
[Amit Varma]: course, the art of podcasting, which I had conducted for three cohorts last year before
[Amit Varma]: I took a break. All my learnings from five years of the seen and the unseen in three
[Amit Varma]: webinars over three Sundays. For more details and to sign up for my writing course, head
[Amit Varma]: on over to indiancut.com slash clear writing. To sign up for my podcasting course, go to
[Amit Varma]: seen unseen.in slash learn. These links will also be at the bottom of the show notes. These
[Amit Varma]: are exciting times for the creator economy, and I'd love to help you be a part of it.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Anna Poona Garimella about whom,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I was telling one of our fellow fellow jurors the other day that if you speak
[Amit Varma]: for more than 30 seconds, I feel like I learned something new, which is a combination of how
[Amit Varma]: insightful you are. And also your world is so different from mine. So I just feel like
[Amit Varma]: I'm learning so much, even even during this conversation. And what have you learned? You've
[Amit Varma]: given me a lot to reflect on. So I don't want to put my finger on things that I have necessarily
[Amit Varma]: learned. But this is a conversation I will revisit. I know it. And I'm sure many of my
[Amit Varma]: listeners will feel the same way. And for a moment, I'll move from the subject of you
[Amit Varma]: speaking to object speaking, which is you know, that point you brought up earlier, which
[Amit Varma]: is so fascinating to me, because we take everything around us in a sense, for granted. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: I, you know, I was I was feeling very jealous earlier, when you were talking about your
[Amit Varma]: innate tendency to notice things deeply. And if there's one thing that I consciously try
[Amit Varma]: to make myself do more, it's notice because I don't notice, I can go through an entire
[Amit Varma]: meal and somebody will ask me what did that taste like? And to my shame, very often I
[Amit Varma]: won't know. Because it's just you're just going through the motions. And one wonders
[Amit Varma]: if, you know, just the world around us, like I remember when I travel, I had once traveled
[Amit Varma]: through Pakistan in 2006, when I was covering the cricket tour there. And I was just looking
[Amit Varma]: at everything with such intense eyes, like walking through Lahore, or when we went to
[Amit Varma]: Peshawar, and we went to bid on the Khyber Pass. And everything I saw just had so much
[Amit Varma]: meaning and value for me, or I was putting meaning into it, because I was desperate to
[Amit Varma]: find things interesting and find things beautiful. And then I come back to Delhi and I'm and
[Amit Varma]: I realized that it's everything is invisible. It's a scene in the unseen. And I guess to
[Amit Varma]: some extent, I think that is what you were alluding to earlier. In the context of object
[Amit Varma]: speaking, I'd really like you to elaborate on that so they can speak to me as well.
[Guest]: I want to say something first before I get to objects being because it's tied, but it's
[Guest]: something you just said, it's about going to Lahore and noticing things. Why do we notice
[Guest]: actually? What are the conditions for noticing? I think, well, there's often the conditions
[Guest]: where you know, you have a bomb blast or some horrible thing happens. Yeah, there's noticing
[Guest]: because a technology is or a social framework is developed around that, which requires noticing,
[Guest]: for example, the marriage photograph. Right? So that's a form of noticing. The selfie is
[Guest]: a form of noticing. To some extent, it might also be a deep form of blinding, too. But
[Guest]: I think that to be noticing, to have noticing as a form of the ethos of life, you have to
[Guest]: be intentional. So you told me when you went to Pakistan, you were very intentional in
[Guest]: your looking. You didn't take anything for granted. So you saw everything. I think that
[Guest]: intention to be present and to look, to notice, notice isn't just passive looking. Noticing,
[Guest]: if you ask me, it isn't necessarily detached either. Like there's this notion of a writer
[Guest]: being detached and observing life and then recording it. No. Noticing is intentional.
[Guest]: It is aware. And it is aware of both thing you're noticing and yourself as you're noticing.
[Guest]: So there is a kind of flowing dialogue between this. And then, of course, there can be many
[Guest]: things that are happening in that situation and you will be connected. What that does,
[Guest]: if you ask me, is begin to populate your world in a very different way. It isn't linear then.
[Guest]: And that's how objects start speaking to you. Because you start understanding, noticing
[Guest]: things. So my Japanese art history professor introduced me to Ogata Kenzan, who is one
[Guest]: of the great ceramists of early modern Japan. Late. So he made many things, but he made
[Guest]: this very beautiful teacup, which is considered a national treasure. And one day I will go
[Guest]: to Japan and maybe I'll get to see it. But it's just one cup and it has all the kind
[Guest]: of... it touches all the criteria that the Japanese people feel is a great coalescence
[Guest]: of beauty. Great coalescence that allows for beauty to be there. So there is a teacup.
[Guest]: So this teacup is no handles. It can fit in the palm of your hand. It is for a tea ceremony.
[Guest]: There would have been, as you're studying this, you would learn that there would be
[Guest]: a tea house. You would learn that by this point, an aesthetic of very noble, elite people
[Guest]: exploring humble things had developed in Japan. So this world of the great, luxurious world
[Guest]: of samurais and the shogunate worlds and all this thing would also have this other component
[Guest]: not... it's not anti to that world, but it's another component. So you would court humble
[Guest]: experiences like sitting on the floor and a bunch of people gathering, but also friendship.
[Guest]: You might learn with your Zen master a tea ceremony, all these sort of things. So here's
[Guest]: this teacup that Ogata Kenzan made. No, I'm not a scholar of Ogata Kenzan. I am very knowledgeable
[Guest]: about my... what I took away from being confronted by Ogata Kenzan's teacup, which is that that
[Guest]: lesson has traveled with me. I was 23 when I first encountered him and his teacup. And
[Guest]: I traveled... that traveled with me and it reconciles and it brings into confrontation
[Guest]: all the things which are considered polarities. Luxury and humility, worldliness, and somebody
[Guest]: who retracts themselves from the world. So all of this is there in this one teacup. And
[Guest]: also the teacup itself, it's the world that produces teacup, all of this is there. And
[Guest]: that teacup itself is designed in such a way that the way that the glaze has emerged is
[Guest]: so accidentally beautiful that it fits into this quality that Japanese... the qualities
[Guest]: that Japanese aesthetics loves, mono no ware, the idea of accidental beauty and the idea
[Guest]: of things which are broken, which can be repaired very beautifully, like with gold, like when
[Guest]: a teacup breaks, you can repair it with a technique called kintsugi, where you use gold
[Guest]: to emphasize the crack, not hide it, but to emphasize the crack. And of course, I'm not
[Guest]: the first person to talk about this. There are people who have fallen in love with Japanese
[Guest]: ideas and objects because they're confronted with these ideas. But for a 23-year-old to
[Guest]: confront this was really important. So this object, I wrote about it, my semester paper
[Guest]: was on this object. And then I kept myself, I've always been very close to this idea of
[Guest]: thinking, because you see art history as a field is deeply complex and contradictory.
[Guest]: You're working with objects often made by people who are not a very economically well-off
[Guest]: standing, they're often deeply vulnerable to power, beheaded, they could be beheaded,
[Guest]: they could be exiled, they could be kidnapped and brought, like some of the most beautiful
[Guest]: carpets that we know are made by populations of weavers who were essentially kidnapped
[Guest]: and brought to a new city because the ruler of that city said, I want this technology,
[Guest]: this talent, this art to be in my city for a new economic product, or because it's prestigious
[Guest]: or whatever. At the same time, art history is full of institutions and people who come
[Guest]: from unbelievably elite backgrounds. So now in the last, the struggle has been ever since
[Guest]: the civil rights movement and to some extent the post-colonial movement and nationalist
[Guest]: movement to question this. So Rabindranath Tagore did it in his own way. Other people
[Guest]: did it in their own way. But at my point, the way I get it is through the civil rights
[Guest]: movement and the feminist movement and the post-colonial movement. But I never really
[Guest]: put everything together in a neat ideological package, in a shelf on which to put this teacup.
[Guest]: So what I get out of this is, I have a small organization that I founded and I run with
[Guest]: my colleague Sindhuja, and we get asked to curate an exhibition for a museum, which no
[Guest]: longer exists in some sense. And we decided, let's do a history of a material. So this
[Guest]: is unusual in and of itself. A history of clay in India after 1947. So how are you going
[Guest]: to tell this story? Clay is a ubiquitous material. Indus Valley is built on clay, right? Indus
[Guest]: Valley, Harappan civilization, whatever you want to call it, it's built on clay. But clay
[Guest]: is completely transformed in value and meaning and purpose at the temperatures that you fire
[Guest]: it, what you use to fire it, how you choose to work with its ephemerality and how you
[Guest]: choose to work with its capacity to be permanent, right? We all know this in some sort of tacit
[Guest]: way when we immerse our Ganeshas, when we break the kulad, when we decide to buy better
[Guest]: quality brick, all these things. But if you decide to sit and meditate on this quality
[Guest]: of clay and write a history of how the qualities of clay are inborn or given to it or over
[Guest]: time, then it's very fascinating to me. So it was my colleague who curated this show
[Guest]: primarily, but there were things that I also worked on because we curated it together.
[Guest]: But the book that she wrote that came out of the exhibition is hers. So we decided to
[Guest]: organize it into some sections. And one of the sections was about studio pottery. And
[Guest]: in studio pottery, there was a table for the people that would be considered the founders
[Guest]: of Indian studio pottery. Among them were people like Devi Prasad Gandhi and Nirmala
[Guest]: Patwardhan from Pune, Ira Chaudhary here from Delhi, and Gurusharan Singhji, who is the
[Guest]: late Gurusharan. All these people are dead except for Ira Chaudhary. So Gurusharan Singhji
[Guest]: was here in Delhi for a long time. In fact, there's a Delhi Blue Apartments, it's still
[Guest]: there next to Ames. So he was a man who came from Jammu to Delhi and started working in
[Guest]: Delhi. He studied geology and his father's friend ran a brick factory here and he said,
[Guest]: I'm making tons of bricks. Why was he making tons of bricks? Because New Delhi was being
[Guest]: built. Delhi that's being broken down and torn apart in some sense was being made by
[Guest]: a group of contractors, including Krishnan Singh's grandfather and several other people.
[Guest]: And this man, Ram Singh Kavli, was a subcontractor to these Indian, five major Indian contractors
[Guest]: who were producing the buildings that Baker and Lutyens had designed, among other people.
[Guest]: So he's here, a 19-year-old man, walking around, working in the brick factory. They're also
[Guest]: observing, and he's also observing the city and he sees this blue everywhere in the monuments
[Guest]: because the British, as they redesigned Delhi, are keeping things which have a slight masala
[Guest]: to them. One of the things that's luscious and delicious is this blue color that you
[Guest]: see in the tombs in Lodhi Gardens and stuff like that. So he's enamored with it and he
[Guest]: also falls in love with this Kavli's daughter and he asks for her hand in marriage. And
[Guest]: he says, well, you can marry her, but you have to go to Japan because Japan was the
[Guest]: big center for ceramic production then, one of the big centers. Germany was another one.
[Guest]: Go and learn how to do commercial ceramic production. So he went to Japan and the principal
[Guest]: there said, you have to learn Japanese. So he started learning Japanese and he fell,
[Guest]: while learning at this institute, while learning commercial production, he fell in with the
[Guest]: group of people who were at the foundational moment of Minge, which is the Japanese arts
[Guest]: and crafts movement, which was responding to Japanese own history of industrialization.
[Guest]: So the arts and crafts movement in England was responding to the rampant industrialization
[Guest]: of England and the degradation of English craft. So people like William Morris were
[Guest]: protesting against it. And also, of course, the entry of products made in India, raw material
[Guest]: that was taken from India, sent to England, made there and then sent back to India. What
[Guest]: was this doing to Indian English production, whatever? So an arts and crafts movement started
[Guest]: where you would labor and make beautiful objects and really make crafts. Of course, the irony
[Guest]: of it is that you can never go back. So these products were exorbitantly expensive because
[Guest]: that's the nature of industrialization. That's one of the characteristics of industrialization
[Guest]: that it uses craft to make craft almost impossible for ordinary people to own. So similarly,
[Guest]: Japan had gone through industrialization. So this Minge movement has started and this
[Guest]: Minge movement had people who were Japanese, like Shoji Hamada, and ideologues and an Englishman
[Guest]: who had been living in and a very famous person for his own leadership in the global studio
[Guest]: pottery movement, Bernard Leach, and Guru Sharan Singh happened to fall into that group.
[Guest]: And this group really praised the handmade, the local. They wanted to de-emphasize authorship.
[Guest]: They wanted to think of the artisan craftsman, the artist craftsman, all these very romantic,
[Guest]: very complex and internally contradictory ideas. And Guru Sharan Singh is absorbing
[Guest]: all of this and he's very, very intelligent man, deeply intelligent man, even at that
[Guest]: age. He comes back to India and he starts work. He marries Chattarkar, Ram Singh Kabli's
[Guest]: daughter. He works in the factory. The factory was situated where Willingdon Airport is there
[Guest]: and now it's Saptarjung Airport. And all these kilns were there and he would have been seeing
[Guest]: lots of things. And then of course, this whole world changes when New Delhi is constructed
[Guest]: and India gains its independence. The big factories close and Guru Sharan Singh, before
[Guest]: independence had already left and was working in various places, Kota, Ambala, setting up
[Guest]: ceramic institutes, working as a geologist in Bundi, actually, for the King of Bundi,
[Guest]: in Bundi State, different, different places. And then he comes back in 1946 to Delhi or
[Guest]: slightly later. He comes back to Delhi and then he starts Delhi Blue Pottery. He's retired
[Guest]: from government service and he starts Delhi Blue Pottery. Now this is a studio pottery
[Guest]: place. And here's where objects have been speaking to him all the time, the blue tiles
[Guest]: in the monuments, the bricks he's making. We don't know what they were saying to him
[Guest]: till this moment. He is listening to, he invites Sharada Ukil, who was a Shantiniketan actor
[Guest]: and who came an artist and also theater person. He came and he designs the tiles for his new
[Guest]: house in Delhi. So when he starts Delhi Blue Pottery in the new way, after independence,
[Guest]: he's confronted that India made this rule that you couldn't import ceramics anymore,
[Guest]: that in fact, domestic ceramics had to take the place because we didn't have any foreign
[Guest]: exchange. So only crafts, the crafts we sold gave us foreign exchange. And not very different
[Guest]: from the British, by the way. So he starts designing products and he's very smart. So
[Guest]: what does Delhi have that needs a lot of products? Already when the railroads had come and Delhi
[Guest]: became major terminus, scholars have, various scholars have pointed out the culture of having
[Guest]: a hotel started, the culture of having China in for dining had started. Gradually as Delhi's
[Guest]: elites, the lalas and the rich elite of Delhi were transformed, they started having tiles,
[Guest]: tiled images of gods and tiles and ceramic plates. All these things started coming into
[Guest]: their household. So that culture had already started. But after independence, the big thing
[Guest]: was there were all these embassies that were being built and all these people who had dinner
[Guest]: parties here and they needed dinnerware because you didn't serve dinner to people in talis,
[Guest]: you served it in crockery. So he started making things that people like to buy and vases and
[Guest]: things, but they were on his terms. And he worked deeply with a potter named Abdullah
[Guest]: who had the secret, the formula for Delhi blue. So it became a signature style for him.
[Guest]: So then for that show that I was curating, we saw a tea set he had made. He made it for
[Guest]: a Chinese restaurant in Kannat Place, lots of things. So this Chinese set is made in
[Guest]: a clay body called stoneware, which is not a native clay body. It's a clay body that
[Guest]: comes from Japan. So he had introduced it because he had this training. So he bought
[Guest]: it from Japan. Now it's a high temperature fired clay, so it's not porous. So it's unlike
[Guest]: a kulad which starts absorbing the chai. This does not absorb the chai. It sits, you glaze
[Guest]: it and then it's sealed in some sense. So he decides, remember how old is tea? Tea itself
[Guest]: is not more than 60, 70 years old as a beverage to drink in India. As a widespread drinking
[Guest]: thing, it's in the 1920s I think that CTC becomes a technology that allows for the finer,
[Guest]: whatever cheaper kind of tea to be made. So tea is growing everywhere. So the kulad itself
[Guest]: is a new invention. So there's been a culture of tea sets in India. Indian people are making
[Guest]: tea sets in silver. They're making them also in bone china, a problem because it has bone
[Guest]: in it and we're a vegetarian country by and large. So in South India, stainless steel
[Guest]: tea sets start emerging as a response to this. So all these objects are telling you about
[Guest]: the society, what the concerns of the society are. And the kind of tea sets that are emerging
[Guest]: here are the version of the tea set. Remember tea came from China to Europe to England and
[Guest]: then of course from India. They all emerge from the British idea of drinking tea or the
[Guest]: European in which you have a cup which holds the beverage and you have a handle and it's
[Guest]: an aristocratic drink in its origins. You hold it and you have a silhouette that your
[Guest]: hand makes with this teacup. So all of this is possible because of the size of the ring
[Guest]: on the teacup. If you have a beer mug or a tankard, it has big rings so that your knuckles
[Guest]: fully enter it and fold over it. So that tells you the nature of the hand that is carrying
[Guest]: that mug to the mouth. The way that the silhouette is, like your muscle would bulge when you
[Guest]: hold that tankard full of beer. When you hold a teacup, you don't need to have any muscle
[Guest]: barely exertion, bare exertion. The Japanese way of thinking about tea is very different.
[Guest]: You hold it in your hand. It is something precious. It warms your hands in a very cold
[Guest]: climate. So the contact between the hand and the hot beverage and the cup is less mediated
[Guest]: by the handle. You have it entirely in your hand.
[Guest]: Gurshanji has seen both the Kular, he would have seen the English teacup and he would
[Guest]: have seen the Japanese teacup. So when he decides to make teacups and he's been part
[Guest]: of Minge, which emphasizes the local, he's also been part of the Swadeshi world because
[Guest]: the Swadeshi movement was big the years he came to Delhi. So local is a big thing. So
[Guest]: what does he do? In Ambala, he designs a tea set. The teapot is designed based on a Kamandalu.
[Guest]: A Kamandalu is a water carrying pot that ascetics, mendicants use to carry holy water. So it
[Guest]: privileges the liquid inside that vessel. Kamandalu is, in some way, elevates the liquid
[Guest]: inside the vessel. The liquid itself might be sacred like the Ganga or the Narmada or,
[Guest]: and because it's in this beautiful pot shaped like a cow, shaped like something made out
[Guest]: of precious materials, is further elevated. And the person who's carrying it, it has a
[Guest]: handle on it. You would put it on your forearm. You will see hundreds of rishis and mendicants
[Guest]: carrying these around. And he takes that as the inspiration for his teapot. So local is
[Guest]: covered. It's made in India, Swadeshi. Then he has to decide, but it's made not out of
[Guest]: bone china, not out of terracruda, which is unfired clay. It is not low fired clay like
[Guest]: okul, but it is stoneware. So from Japan. Now he cannot import all the materials to
[Guest]: make Japanese stoneware. So if you do an analysis of that teacup, that tea set, you will understand
[Guest]: that he digested all of this knowledge and experience, found local clay bodies, local
[Guest]: minerals, synthesized all of this to produce a local clay body that had Japan in it, that
[Guest]: had England in it, and that had the Indic world in it. And then this clay body, he has
[Guest]: to decide the shape of the teacup. So I remember my Ogata Kenzan again very deeply. And I see
[Guest]: that his teacup has a handle, but the shape of the teacup is somewhere between the English
[Guest]: teacup, the Kuladish kind of shape, because to produce vast quantities, he'll have people
[Guest]: helping him to throw this, and the Japanese teacup. So somehow he's mediated all these
[Guest]: anxieties. We're a new Indian nation. We have dinner parties, and we're English in the way
[Guest]: we present ourselves. He's producing something that doesn't look English. It has no floral
[Guest]: designs. It's not white bone china. It doesn't have any meat in it, any bone in it, nothing.
[Guest]: He's done all these things. And when you hold that teacup, all you have to do is listen
[Guest]: to what it's telling you. And then you can start doing this research, or you can do all
[Guest]: this research and come to the teacup and say, how do you hold the whole story, all the stories
[Guest]: of the clay, and Gursharanji, and the histories of tea in yourself as you're in my hand? And
[Guest]: that's how objects speak. And when you see that tea, that warm tea in that cup with milk
[Guest]: in it, because Japanese don't drink it with milk, and the English don't necessarily drink
[Guest]: it with milk, but the way the tea was marketed in India by Lipton, door to door they went
[Guest]: and told people, because people drank milk in northern India, they told them how to mix
[Guest]: it with sugar and milk to make it more marketable. So here we are, people drinking milky tea,
[Guest]: which has a particular color in this cup that could be anywhere from a mossy green to brown
[Guest]: to a deep deli blue. And it looks really nothing like Japanese, nothing like English, nothing
[Guest]: like a kulad. It is its own thing. And we, as I, as an art historian, as a person engaging
[Guest]: with this deeply, have to be able to listen to those things, what it's telling me, and
[Guest]: respond to it and articulate it.
[Amit Varma]: So you've, you've just shown me the universe in a tea cup and you asked me earlier, what
[Amit Varma]: have I learned from you? And this is, you've added a new layer of appreciation that I'll
[Amit Varma]: have when I look at a tea cup the next time.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, you should.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't drink tea, so it won't be too soon.
[Guest]: You can look at your coffee cup.
[Amit Varma]: I can look at my coffee cup. No, no, it's so kind of fascinating. Now, okay, I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to ask you a sort of provocative general question that can also dive back to this. You know,
[Amit Varma]: I just remembered this joke that I heard in school, which is, you know, in the 1980s,
[Amit Varma]: or maybe early 90s, when I was just in college. And it's a joke about MF Hussain. And the
[Amit Varma]: joke is that this rich industrialist goes to Hussain and tells him that I want to, you
[Amit Varma]: know, commission a painting from you, will you paint something for me? And Hussain isn't
[Amit Varma]: feeling particularly creative at that moment, but he says, okay. And after the guy is gone,
[Amit Varma]: he just spreads out a lot of red paint on the floor. He takes off his clothes, gets
[Amit Varma]: naked, sits down on it, then he goes and sits on a canvas. He calls it Apple that sells
[Amit Varma]: for a crore. Okay, that's a joke, right? And my question here is this, that when I think
[Amit Varma]: of art, and by art, I mean, you know, paintings, fine art, that kind of stuff with any other
[Amit Varma]: art form, like literature and music and cinema, I just feel that beyond the point, what I
[Amit Varma]: think of them is not mediated by elites, what artists like what what seems to happen with
[Amit Varma]: fine art is that you become a painter, but then whether you're considered a great artist
[Amit Varma]: or not a great artist, doesn't depend so much on what, you know, reaction you might necessarily
[Amit Varma]: have on the general public out there, the aam aadmi like me, but on a group of narrow
[Amit Varma]: elites, who might be driven by a certain kind of ideology or politics, who will then pass
[Amit Varma]: judgment on the art, and someone becomes a great artist, and someone becomes just a craftsman
[Amit Varma]: and is forgotten by time. And it's a very small group of people kind of deciding this
[Amit Varma]: is not a larger process. And you know, if you don't fit the flavor of the moment, you
[Amit Varma]: could just be lost. Like I have actually spoken to artists who've pointed out to what critics
[Amit Varma]: have written about them in praise, and said, Ki mujhe kuch samajh bhi nahi aaya wo kya
[Amit Varma]: bol raha hai. Because these are just artists who are just doing work they love for whatever
[Amit Varma]: reasons they love doing. And then, you know, you'll have critics and the gatekeepers apply
[Amit Varma]: their own kind of lenses to it. And in that sense, I think that world of fine art seems
[Amit Varma]: to me to be very different from all these other artistic worlds, where someone in a
[Amit Varma]: far corner somewhere can write a book, and me random person can read it, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: react to it, and it's not dependent on someone else's judgment. I mean, this sounds really
[Amit Varma]: negative, I'm not being entirely critical, you know, like, even when it comes to poetry,
[Amit Varma]: for example, you know, before I really got into poetry, I would think that some poetry
[Amit Varma]: is like this, that I just don't get it, what the hell is going on. And I remember reading
[Amit Varma]: Mary Oliver's great book, Poetry Handbook, and rereading the poem Red Wheelbarrow, she
[Amit Varma]: deepened my appreciation of it, to the extent that I tear up when I read that poem, that
[Amit Varma]: there's no reason for me to, it's not about any concrete thing, but it just has such a
[Amit Varma]: powerful impact on me. And I understand that a lot of art, which, you know, is not accessible,
[Amit Varma]: can be approached in that way. But, and this question struck me, because earlier, you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how that art wasn't something just restricted to the privileged or whatever, and books were
[Amit Varma]: because of printing press, and, you know, not everybody could, you know, necessarily
[Amit Varma]: read and write. So what would be your response to this rambling question, which I did not
[Amit Varma]: intend to be offensive, but I am now worried that...
[Guest]: I really, really like not being offended easily. It gives me in a lot of space. And then I
[Guest]: can really have nice conversations. So thank you for asking your question. There's a lot
[Guest]: in that question. And as you rightly said, it's rambling, but it's also has threads of
[Guest]: which are not unique to you. These are large pressing concerns that historians and critics
[Guest]: and people have taken very seriously and deeply. So I think you're going to have to help me
[Guest]: unpack your own questions as I talk to your question as I engage with it.
[Guest]: Okay, let me let me...
[Guest]: No, I'm happy to answer it.
[Amit Varma]: Let me add to it in another context, which is the context of music. I read this very
[Amit Varma]: interesting thread recently about Billy Joel and his first album, Piano Man, right? Now,
[Amit Varma]: what happened when that album came out, and the album was brought out by a record label,
[Amit Varma]: it came out, but the record label itself wasn't enthusiastic. Radio stations were simply not
[Amit Varma]: playing it. So they were going to give up on the album and not give Joel any more work.
[Amit Varma]: And he was basically finished at that point. Till one random enthusiast fell in love with
[Amit Varma]: it so much that he got in touch with the record label and said, why the hell aren't you promoting
[Amit Varma]: this? And they just weren't interested. So this guy, and I'll, you know, post that thread
[Amit Varma]: from my show notes, went around to different radio stations. And at one point with a big
[Amit Varma]: radio station, he did a quid pro quo deal of some sort with somebody so that they would
[Amit Varma]: play the record for a day. And they started playing Piano Man for a day. And then listeners
[Amit Varma]: started phoning in and saying, we want more of this. What is this? This is amazing. And
[Amit Varma]: then it blew up and Billy Joel's had the career that he's had. Now, the truth of the matter
[Amit Varma]: is that that this is art. This is not something that is appealing to crass popular sentiment.
[Amit Varma]: It is it is great art. And I mean, that's what I would say what Billy Joel's work and
[Amit Varma]: certainly Piano Man, and it would have been completely lost if it hadn't had a chance
[Amit Varma]: to get democratized in this way and to reach a larger audience in this way. Similarly,
[Amit Varma]: to continue with music, I think of Johann Sebastian Bach, who was not a big figure in
[Amit Varma]: his own lifetime. And after he died in the decades after he died, there was this kind
[Amit Varma]: of Bach Renaissance or whatever, I forget the exact term that people give to it, where
[Amit Varma]: he became elevated in our consciousness to become the legend he is. And you would imagine
[Amit Varma]: he was always a legend. No, in his lifetime, he was nothing. The elites of the day, who
[Amit Varma]: were the arbiters of taste, did not care for Bach. And it it took these centuries for him
[Amit Varma]: to come. And with all of those with books, with music, you can talk about what about
[Amit Varma]: the unseen talents who never quite managed to emerge, but at least in those fields, you
[Amit Varma]: had a better chance. In art, it seems to me that if you don't fit a particular conception
[Amit Varma]: of art that elites may have, you're not going to make it in the fine art world. And a lot
[Amit Varma]: of talented people might today say that that's irrelevant anyway, we'll do art in a different
[Amit Varma]: way. So yeah, so that's kind of my elaboration.
[Guest]: Sheiltan Pethi That's a good one. So I can answer this in
[Guest]: so many different ways. So I don't even know where to start, but let's try all of them.
[Guest]: So first of all, I was never interested in the distinction between fine art and art.
[Guest]: This distinction was produced and a certain moment in time, let's say in India, when the
[Guest]: colonial art schools were set up, JJ, Calcutta, Madras, Lahore. So because you had to produce
[Guest]: a population that was trained in a certain way to produce craft, or you had to produce
[Guest]: a population that need to be saved in or by middle class and elite people in order to
[Guest]: preserve inheritances and heritages. And then there were going to be a group of people who
[Guest]: would be fine artists who would help it become more civilized or modern or whatever, depending
[Guest]: on which language or which kind of things. So I wasn't interested in it except as a historical
[Guest]: artifact. So if we set that aside, what do we have then? What we have is a field of production,
[Guest]: a field of thought, a field of sensuous experiences, a field of aesthetic proclivities. If that's
[Guest]: the case, then I'm interested in everything. And I've been this way from the time I, because
[Guest]: I come from that generation, I think partly, but also because I'm listening to Hindi film
[Guest]: music and I'm listening to T.K. Pattamal, but I'm also coming from a world which was
[Guest]: where art making wasn't as thoroughly industrialized as it has become through certain kinds of
[Guest]: technological forms over the last century, right? Those things were still available to
[Guest]: us in India in the 1950s and 60s and 70s when we were born. When I was born in 1966, I was
[Guest]: born in. So I think that something about your perspective is also the experience of living
[Guest]: in a certain kind of world. Now, then there is this whole question of taste. So here you
[Guest]: have Pierre Bourdieu, the French sociologist who talks about constructing social distinction
[Guest]: and taste and all these sort of things. So knowing what is good art didn't constitute
[Guest]: a form of social distinction in the world that I lived in. For most people in India,
[Guest]: it's cast or much cruder forms of capital demonstration, much more obvious forms of
[Guest]: capital, not cruder, but art can be pretty damn crude. Forms of distinction are there.
[Guest]: So that's one set of answers. Another set of answers are, one set of statements.
[Amit Varma]: I should clarify that this wasn't sort of a challenge to you per se. I understand that
[Guest]: you're in a much broader.
[Guest]: I think we're discussing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So I'm talking more about the art world. I understand that you're.
[Guest]: Yeah. So I'll come to the art world. So I come to the art world. I'm coming there, but
[Guest]: we have to map this ground out first. So who goes to art school? So I told you that early
[Guest]: on art schools were set up. There was a population of people who were hereditary craftspeople
[Guest]: who were brought to teach. They were potters, let's say from Multan, who were brought to
[Guest]: JJ to teach people how to make art pottery. They were people who were weavers, came from
[Guest]: weavers families, and they learned weaving in their own households and their own communities,
[Guest]: but had to go to school for weaving in order to produce the way the British wanted them
[Guest]: to produce.
[Guest]: So there is a set of systems that started developing in our country, in the world over
[Guest]: in the modern world, which created certain groups as elite producers and certain people
[Guest]: as less than elite producers. Simultaneously, it produced elite consumers, elite patrons,
[Guest]: whatever. Patronage was of course, elite patronage is a much older phenomenon, but elite consumers.
[Guest]: And then there are people who want to affiliate with certain kinds of eliteness because they
[Guest]: would like to be an elite art critic or whatever, right? So there's a production and a proliferation
[Guest]: of class classifications, distinctions. So words like kitsch have been thought about
[Guest]: very deeply. Words like popular categories, like popular culture. I work with the category
[Guest]: called vernacular art. All these things are deeply, deeply problematic and deeply important
[Guest]: because they've shaped entire art worlds. So after independence, any, the who goes to
[Guest]: art school, very often they're people who come from well-off families. They also might
[Guest]: come up, it's a great melting pot also from other kinds of families, people who have some
[Guest]: modicum of education, at least let's put the common denominator is there. It's primarily
[Guest]: men also, because women have always have practiced some form of art or the other in India, either
[Guest]: embroidery if they're middle-class women or cooking or painting of some kind like alpana
[Guest]: or these are certain. So certain art forms like Tagore's great intervention was to say
[Guest]: all of these forms could become part of the curriculum of Shantiniketan. And we could
[Guest]: have an institution called Sriniketan that would also cultivate these forms. So art is
[Guest]: being defined by that institution to be in a much broader way. It's when MS University,
[Guest]: this is our art world. I'm going to talk about our art world because our meaning, the art
[Guest]: world we have here in India. So when we have MS University Fine Arts Department set up,
[Guest]: it is set up with a great nobility of intention. Hansa Mehta was a great woman and she was
[Guest]: deeply involved in setting up the program. The early people who were behind it, like
[Guest]: Markand Bhatt, who had come from the Barnes Foundation in Philadelphia back, had spent
[Guest]: a lot of time with great modern, the modernist collection there. So there was an idea of
[Guest]: what would constitute not the Bombay progressives, not the Shantiniketan way of being progressive,
[Guest]: not the colonial art school way of being. What would be this new language that would
[Guest]: be taught here? So of course, there were all sorts of things that happened there. K. G.
[Guest]: Subramaniam insisted on bringing lots of craft and Gulam Ahmed Sheikh, who also taught there
[Guest]: later on, was very interested in promoting an engagement with Indian manuscript painting.
[Guest]: But in the process, and there were people like Bhupen Kakkar who were not formally trained
[Guest]: but were deeply interested in using the medium of painting to talk about unbelievably complex
[Guest]: things like being a gay man in middle-class Baroda. And he wrote lovely short stories
[Guest]: as well. And he wrote lovely short stories. And when I think of his painting, You Can't
[Guest]: Please All, I just cry. I cry. It's this man looking out, his naked body on a balcony looking
[Guest]: out into the square. And it's based on that parable of the donkey and people wanting to
[Guest]: be in conformity so much that they want to please all. And he's standing there reflecting
[Guest]: on all of this and realizing at that moment in life, it's a gray man. It's not a young
[Guest]: body that's in that painting. You can't please all. And I saw this for the first time in
[Guest]: person at the Tate when they had the exhibition there. And I really think that all these possibilities
[Guest]: were there and they continue to be there. But we did not have an art market like this.
[Guest]: We had ideology. Ideology and we had teaching lineages. We had cross affiliations. So if
[Guest]: you went to Shantiniketan, you might come to teach at Baroda and then go back to teach
[Guest]: at Shantiniketan. You might go and teach in Rajahmundry or in Vishakhapatnam or start
[Guest]: a school in Hyderabad or wherever. But the art market really starts growing. So if we
[Guest]: look at an institution like Kemold in Bombay, it created a place for people to sell paintings,
[Guest]: but it didn't see itself as constructing an investor's market. There was no possibility.
[Guest]: The TIFR, Homi Bhabha and the Tatas, they were the big patrons of art in Bombay and
[Guest]: they made institutional collections which are now unbelievably valuable in terms of
[Guest]: monetary ideas. But when the art market comes, and this is where we must go back to our dear
[Guest]: Karl Marx, capital changes social relationships. So social relationships, what is an art world
[Guest]: but a set of social relationships that are founded on capital. And here, it's very important
[Guest]: to keep marking out distinction. And in this way, it's no different from books, it's no
[Guest]: different from music. It's just that the realm, the geographic expanse of art making that
[Guest]: comes out of formal art academic teaching. Do you know only 2% of students who graduate
[Guest]: from art schools actually become professional artists in the sense of showing work in galleries?
[Guest]: The rest of them become set designers, they might do puja pandas, they might become graphic
[Guest]: designers, they might do animation, they might do so many other things. So this 2% is, but
[Guest]: so the largest population of artists are not these artists. They're the artists who do
[Guest]: temple sculptures and who do this and this and this and this. Remember, the largest population
[Guest]: after farmers in India is weavers and textile workers. So if we look at the idea of culture
[Guest]: work as one idea and art production in the gallery sense of it is just one facet of it.
[Guest]: First it changes our framework. Now you're talking about people feeling like why am I
[Guest]: left out of the game? And it is a game in some sense, an economic game. Because it's
[Guest]: a market and so many people, and I'm not the person who can speak the most interestingly,
[Guest]: but you'll get yourself an art gallerist who is willing to talk honestly. Their words are
[Guest]: worth are like pure bouillon compared to mine, because they really know the inside information
[Amit Varma]: and things.
[Amit Varma]: But you know what they would say, so you can tell me.
[Guest]: I don't know if I know what they would say, but I would say that I know how they're positioned
[Guest]: to some extent. What I feel is that the way that the art world developed in India in the
[Guest]: last, let's say, 20-30 years is not the way Camel started. It's not the way a Mary Boone
[Guest]: in New York or Alfred Stiegler or any of these great supporters. What you have is a bunch
[Guest]: of people who are kind of interested in something. So a lot of culture work in India is supported
[Guest]: by industrial families through their women in their family. It's a gendered project culture.
[Guest]: And this is not going to make anyone happy, but I must say this. I'm not the only one
[Guest]: to say it, but I will say it.
[Guest]: Till very recently, much of this fine art world that you're talking about was supported
[Guest]: by black money. Now, this is black money coming from buyers. It's black money that artists
[Guest]: are being paid, and it's black money that's being laundered through this business called
[Guest]: art, sale and resale. So when you have this, it constructs very little space for intellection.
[Guest]: So how do economics impact the space for intellection in art? So there's very little room for investing
[Guest]: in something that's risky. A lot of it is based on nepotism. You scratch my back, I'll
[Guest]: scratch your back. A lot of it is also the situation you're talking about is based on
[Guest]: obfuscating this rather mundane world. What part of India is not based on black money?
[Guest]: Let's be really clear about this. Obfuscating this through opaque discourse, which is unbelievably
[Guest]: unreadable. It's hard to understand. Then art education itself does not prepare artists
[Guest]: to intellect about their own work. And that's the saddest thing. When we think about early
[Guest]: artists, they wrote their manifestos. A manifesto is a deep act of intellection. You are proposing
[Guest]: something. It's a propositional thing, a proposal for an art world, for a kind of art community,
[Guest]: for a kind of economics, for whatever it is, a language. Many artists were also pedagogues.
[Guest]: So again, you have to think this through. They also wrote books about it. Paul Klee,
[Guest]: KG Subramaniam, Rabindranath Tagore, all these people wrote books about what does it mean
[Guest]: to teach, to make, to live, to think about art. So you have a group of people who are
[Guest]: today not taught very well to intellect about their own work. So it very quickly moves to
[Guest]: how do you represent yourself? Once you jump into that act of representing yourself, it's
[Guest]: like you're already in a selfie place without self-knowledge. So then the people that have
[Guest]: really deep self-knowledge are really spending the time thinking. Sometimes they are able
[Guest]: to take up a lot of space because there's also a market for the thinking artist, the
[Guest]: intellecting artist. Now, whether they're thinking something deeply original all the
[Guest]: time, that's a different question, but they're thinking. And I'm not sure how much originality
[Guest]: is possible sometimes either. I think there's work that is so interesting that it makes
[Guest]: you think about thinking. There's work that's so interesting that makes you think about
[Guest]: the idea of originality. But whether complete originality in some sense of having nothing,
[Guest]: no connection, sui generis emerging, I think that's almost impossible.
[Amit Varma]: So I think my rough provocation has led to a subtle critique from you, which kind of
[Amit Varma]: went in the same direction, right? Am I right?
[Guest]: I'm critiquing your critique while saying the same thing you're saying in some ways.
[Amit Varma]: And thank you for that, because you'll improve my critique the next time I make it by doing
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: But I think that in all of this, there are people who are making unbelievably interesting
[Guest]: work. They are. And how is that possible? I'm a product of, let me put it this way,
[Guest]: they're making choices that are hard choices, but in their living. I don't think it was
[Guest]: easy to be Nazrin Mohammadi when everybody else was practicing a different kind of art.
[Guest]: She was doing this like really, really abstract work. And I don't think she was in the pocket
[Guest]: of any great institution in the West either. It took her many decades after her death for
[Guest]: her work to gain that kind of recognition. And that's also the market.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so I'm going to commit you with another question where I think we won't exactly be
[Amit Varma]: in agreement. You've been sort of decrying and lamenting what you called industrialization
[Amit Varma]: and commercialization and the market and all of those things. I would go the other way.
[Amit Varma]: And I would say that for artists, I would in fact celebrate that. And the reason I would
[Amit Varma]: celebrate that is that I don't think they lead as some people imply to homogenization
[Amit Varma]: of culture and the death of creativity or any of those things. I think what they instead
[Amit Varma]: do is that individuals get empowered in various ways through technology and otherwise, to
[Amit Varma]: actually be able to express themselves in unusual ways that otherwise would not have
[Amit Varma]: been open to them. In fact, I think, you know, a lot of people today with maybe a visual
[Amit Varma]: imagination or someone who wants to story tell through images may not need to go in
[Amit Varma]: for the fine arts. They can be filmmakers, they can do other things, which are not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: lower forms of art. I mean, God knows what kind of manner Bhupen Khakkar would have expressed
[Amit Varma]: himself in and he did it brilliantly in two mediums as we spoke about, but maybe he could
[Amit Varma]: have been a filmmaker, maybe he could have been a YouTube creator, for example, and I
[Amit Varma]: would not, you know, look down on any of those like just speaking of my own podcast, for
[Amit Varma]: example, I think commercialization, the markets, what they have done is they have put the technology
[Amit Varma]: in my hands to make exactly the kind of show I want, which conventional wisdom would tell
[Amit Varma]: you will not work long for our conversations with obscure scholars like me. And the conventional
[Amit Varma]: wisdom would not have allowed me to do this. I have been empowered by all these things
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned industrialization, commercialization, which I don't think are necessarily bad words.
[Amit Varma]: I think they are good for artists because more and more people have gotten the means
[Amit Varma]: of production in their own hands. They are not dependent on gatekeepers. They're not
[Amit Varma]: dependent on like you spoke about how the cultural project today is almost like a vanity
[Amit Varma]: project of the wives of industrialists. Most artists are not dependent on that. That is
[Amit Varma]: not even a project that I take seriously. You know, most artists can do what they want
[Amit Varma]: today. And they are empowered to do that by the fact that you know, the technology is
[Amit Varma]: there, the markets are there, I can produce a show which you know, 30 years ago, I would
[Amit Varma]: have been laughed out of any room of any radio station if I, you know, propose something
[Amit Varma]: like this. And I can reach my viewers. And you know, they can express their appreciation
[Amit Varma]: for it in monetary and non monetary ways. So that kind of would be my counterpoint that
[Amit Varma]: I, I feel that this invocation of industrialization, commercialization is a bad thing. And I understand
[Amit Varma]: that in many domains, it leads to homogenization, we are losing languages, we are losing different
[Amit Varma]: types of bananas, the freaking bland Cavendish banana is everywhere, because of these forces.
[Amit Varma]: So I get the negative aspect of it. But I don't think that it's a death knell of art.
[Amit Varma]: On the contrary, I think it is what has empowered so many individual artists to do their thing
[Amit Varma]: without needing to please gatekeepers or elites.
[Guest]: So bravo. I don't think I'm decrying industry, industrial means. I'm not decrying the technological
[Guest]: or the commercial. So when we add the word ization to industry, or commercial, we are
[Guest]: talking about something else than mere industry. We're talking about a logic and ethos that
[Guest]: pervades every aspect. So that's something we have to keep in mind. So it's one thing
[Guest]: to set up a factory. So for example, a cottage industry is a scale. It's an ethos of making,
[Guest]: but it's still an industry in the way that the Indian government thought about it till
[Guest]: very recently. So you might be making thousands of dias, and it's mass production. And it
[Guest]: might be a cottage industry. So then an industry that produces porcelain dias on molds in a
[Guest]: factory is also making dias, but they're doing it in a different way. And then if you think
[Guest]: that the way of making dias in a cottage industry is a problem, and the only way to make dias
[Guest]: is the one that this is making, then we know that there's a problem there. That's what's
[Guest]: happened. And then there's another thing that says, this is even too expensive. You have
[Guest]: to pay workers their salaries and blah, blah, blah. Let's just get LED lights from China
[Guest]: and string them all over, which is what's also happening. And this takes care of the
[Guest]: whole dia business. There's no mess of oil. We don't have to pay workers. It's cheap.
[Guest]: It's throwaway. So it's very important to think about what something does. So let's
[Guest]: go back to rap music. Let's go back to music and let's talk about rap music. Rap music
[Guest]: is a deeply crafted form of music that comes out of industrialized music production. So
[Guest]: the idea of taking records and capturing snippets from previous records, adjusting, crafting
[Guest]: them, recrafting them, retooling them, retooling the record player to become an instrument.
[Guest]: All this is recrafting. It's a second order of craft. It's not a primary order of craft.
[Guest]: So craft and industrialization are not opposed. There's a very great scholar whose name I've
[Guest]: forgotten who talks about the fact that in the Soviet Union, when people had factories,
[Guest]: these machines that they ran were industrially produced. But because the Soviet Union's economy
[Guest]: was so bad, all repairs had to be done by the person that ran that particular machine.
[Guest]: In the end, that machine was thoroughly handcrafted, all parts had to be remade, and only that
[Guest]: person could run it because they had made it. So there isn't a linear journey here.
[Guest]: So what you're saying about technology being put into the hands of many people, like for
[Guest]: example rappers or you or even me, maybe I wouldn't be able to do the kind of work I
[Guest]: like doing if certain things had not happened. But they also have really profound effects.
[Guest]: And I'm interested in understanding the effects.
[Amit Varma]: So I actually think we're in agreement because we both agree that there are good aspects
[Guest]: and bad aspects to this.
[Guest]: Is it necessary to think about things in agreement?
[Amit Varma]: We're looking at different parts of the same elephant and that's really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm going to look at another part of the elephant in terms of the exact limb that you
[Amit Varma]: examined of the elephant, but from another side, which is that earlier it struck me like
[Amit Varma]: you when you spoke about your years in the US, and you said that you were there at a
[Amit Varma]: time where one if you look at the past society had just made the massive mistake of the Vietnam
[Amit Varma]: War.
[Amit Varma]: And yet at the same time, society could reflect upon the massive mistake of the Vietnam War.
[Amit Varma]: And I had a slight disagreement with that phrasing or I found it a little simplistic
[Amit Varma]: because I am wary of terms like society subsuming individuals. I think the individuals who took
[Amit Varma]: America into the Vietnam War are a very different set who may not necessarily have reflected.
[Amit Varma]: And the individuals who reflected are reflecting not on their own actions, but the actions
[Amit Varma]: of others.
[Amit Varma]: I'd rather think in terms of individuals. And I think that using group terms like society
[Amit Varma]: or in a later sense, industrialization, you know, can hide some of the nuances that lie
[Guest]: within.
[Guest]: They have their limits. They're limit terms. They're not terms that can hold everything.
[Guest]: So in America during the Vietnam War, I mean, remember, I'm only eight and a half, nine
[Guest]: at that time. How did I experience remorse or regret or those sort of things? That was
[Guest]: from seeing people who were, it was very narcissistic. American remorse was very narcissistic.
[Guest]: That's a great way to put it.
[Guest]: Yes. I'm not the first person to put it. There's a wonderful Vietnamese American writer who
[Guest]: writes it about this beautifully. I forgot his name. His book got nominated for some
[Guest]: major award. It was very narcissistic. You know, I was, let's say, let me put it this
[Guest]: way. I was in 1971. I was five years old. I was in Bhopal and the bombs and we had to
[Guest]: black out our windows in Bhopal because of the fear of bombing.
[Guest]: And I never grew up in a world that was very lengthy. I'm, and I know now because I've
[Guest]: seen much more of the archive that was virulently anti-Chinese or anti-Muslim. It wasn't, there
[Guest]: wasn't that kind of virulent anti-Muslim rhetoric in my world about this war.
[Guest]: I go to America and I see remorse or regret about Vietnam, not so much about Vietnamese
[Guest]: people, but about a president who promoted the Vietnam War, Lyndon B. Johnson, and then
[Guest]: less about Johnson, but particularly Nixon. Now we know the story is even more complex
[Guest]: than I'm saying it now because he did Watergate and he was like this megalomaniac. It challenged
[Guest]: America's ideas about its own democratic commitments.
[Guest]: So the Vietnamese people were maybe a picture on Life Magazine, that young girl with her
[Guest]: back burning from napalm running. Those kinds of things, but in general, and I think there's
[Guest]: a lot of people, Vietnam veterans, they were vastly, how do you experience remorse? Well,
[Guest]: you might drug yourself to death, alcoholism to death. And America in the 1970s, you saw
[Guest]: that, you saw that in public spaces.
[Amit Varma]: I was making a point about language actually, where, you know, the use of the term society
[Amit Varma]: and even now you said that America's own idea of its whatever, and even that's such a general
[Guest]: term.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to talk in generalizations, but then I'm going to keep working away from them.
[Amit Varma]: So can I go back to your earlier point about industrialization and do that, where you said
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, you spoke of industrialization and you invoked the image of millions of the
[Amit Varma]: hours being produced and suddenly then you get LED lights from China and that's it. That's
[Amit Varma]: not all that industrialization is. So industrialization is also giving us the microphones, the software
[Amit Varma]: tools that I used to make my podcast. And if there are budding filmmakers who are making
[Amit Varma]: their own short films, putting them on YouTube, all those tools, which they couldn't have
[Amit Varma]: dreamed of using 20 years ago, are now in their hands.
[Guest]: I think we're thinking about industrialization in two different ways.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm saying that your way is perhaps reductive and not appreciative enough of the nuance
[Guest]: that individuals are so empowered.
[Guest]: No, I am not at all a Luddite. I am not at all a Luddite.
[Guest]: I am not anti-industrial, but I am very aware that the developmentalist agenda that was
[Guest]: thrust upon this country, which was so intensely committed to industrializing, I am a product
[Guest]: of Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, right? I grew up in an uncle who was a controller
[Guest]: of Hindustan machine and tools in Hyderabad. So I'm completely a product of that world.
[Guest]: But we have to be aware that the way we make things, the things we make and the way we
[Guest]: make things make us. And you asked the question about why so much stuff is being made and
[Guest]: called art. Why is it some stuff not being called art? It has some things to do with
[Guest]: that. In fact, so many things which are not industrially, every fine artwork is actually
[Guest]: industrially produced. Where is that paint coming from? Who's sitting around grinding
[Guest]: that paint?
[Amit Varma]: But what's wrong with that?
[Guest]: There's nothing wrong with that. So in fact, it is very important to find out the relationships
[Guest]: between different modes of production is what I'm saying, and then how they make the art
[Guest]: form. So just because millions of diyas are made in a potter's workshop, diyas are made
[Guest]: in a factory and LED, it doesn't mean that one, it's not a teleological relationship.
[Guest]: One doesn't come to an end and another doesn't come. Somebody might figure out which they
[Guest]: have to wire a terracotta diya with an LED light. This is the nature of making, and I'm
[Guest]: interested in that, but it's going to produce certain kinds of situations. That is exactly
[Guest]: you mass produce technology, speakers, this thing, that thing at different levels. There
[Guest]: might be, I don't know, 5,000 such microphones made a year for this quality or whatever,
[Guest]: and you have access to it and you're able to do this beautiful thing.
[Guest]: Everyone has access to it.
[Guest]: Everyone has money.
[Amit Varma]: No, no. You know, I think TikTok showed that. That TikTok for me was revolutionary because
[Guest]: it showed that to be a creator, you don't need access to money.
[Guest]: Everybody can be a creator. I don't want to link creativity with production. Many societies
[Guest]: like the other places in the Trobriand Islands or whatever, imagine that creativity is something
[Guest]: that's imminent in the universe, and I believe that. We, at certain historical moments, certain
[Guest]: production methods construct that creativity in certain ways and market it in certain ways,
[Guest]: make it possible to come from imminence into a particular form of imminence, so a novel,
[Guest]: a podcast, whatever it is.
[Guest]: There are people in India who have access to certain kinds of technology, which they
[Guest]: would not have had before, but the minute, for example, when COVID came, they were robbed
[Guest]: of the access to that. There are people who are more vulnerable to precarity, to the lack
[Amit Varma]: of access than others.
[Amit Varma]: I will say one thing, though, with reference to TikTok, that after COVID came, some of
[Amit Varma]: the best art about COVID, which took time to emerge, was on TikTok.
[Guest]: I'm glad it was there.
[Guest]: It got banned two or three months after.
[Guest]: I have zero opinions about certain technologies or whatever. Like, for example, I'm totally
[Guest]: fascinated by cranes. We went to the JCB factory. They had a little display of their machinery.
[Guest]: I was like, wow, I love cranes. But if you go to central India and you look at the mines
[Guest]: there and the way that mining is happening there, you know that that place has been rich
[Guest]: in mineral since the beginning of time, maybe, for eons, and that people in that area have
[Guest]: known how to get metal for their needs for thousands of years.
[Guest]: But if you put that JCB craneI'm going to be killed for thisand Earthmover into
[Guest]: and have it produce, excavate the earth at a pace far greater than an axe or something,
[Guest]: it's going to produce something else. It produces a new relationship to the earth. It produces
[Guest]: a new aesthetics. I want to be attentive to that, not whether this technology is bad or
[Guest]: that technology is bad or is industrialization bad or what. These things emerge in certain
[Guest]: ways and are used in certain ways, and I want to understand that. I want to understand that.
[Guest]: And I want to understand who wins, who loses, how are we transformed. And it's not just
[Guest]: about winners and looters. I also don't like binaries. It's not about being pro-industrialization.
[Guest]: It's about understanding things, not accepting them so easily or rejecting them so easily.
[Guest]: It's about understanding that that's what emphasizing the dynamic things are. If things
[Guest]: aren't dynamic enough, if Earthmovers today have not made it possible for people to developI
[Guest]: don't know, I'm just making an exaggerated, silly examplenew kinds of housing that
[Guest]: everybody can afford very rapidly, if it's not been miniaturized enough so that lots
[Guest]: of things can happen, whatever, that's because we don't care enough to do those kinds of
[Guest]: things.
[Amit Varma]: So on this, we are completely on the same page.
[Guest]: And he wanted us to get there. That's why it was important to you to have this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: No, no. I mean, it's like different angles of an elephant. We don't have to agree or
[Amit Varma]: disagree or anything, like you correctly said. But we are entirely on the same page. But
[Amit Varma]: I would say that the exact analogy that you made, the exact field that you spoke of mining,
[Amit Varma]: I think what we've really seen over time, and you just happened to take the JCB name,
[Amit Varma]: I think we should both clarify. I think I can clarify on your behalf that we have no
[Amit Varma]: opinions on JCB at all, except that they run this brilliant literature foundation and more
[Amit Varma]: power to them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But in general terms, I would say that something like mining illustrates how we have moved
[Amit Varma]: from a parasite state to parasite crony capitalists. And in both of those cases, I think the problem
[Amit Varma]: is not a conceptual problem with markets and industrialization, but with power. But that's
[Guest]: perhaps a different kind of...
[Guest]: Yeah, but power doesn't exist in an abstract way.
[Amit Varma]: Of course it doesn't.
[Guest]: It doesn't exist in a... And power is reconceptualized when new things come along. So for example,
[Guest]: human beings have loved to extract things from the earth, as I said. Diamonds, Golconda
[Guest]: diamonds for example. But if you have... Golconda diamonds were like this. I like the mining
[Guest]: analogy because it covers a gamut. So Golconda diamonds were so precious, they could become
[Guest]: a God's eyes. Kings had the first dibs on the largest stone recovered. You didn't emphasize
[Guest]: faceting, you emphasized weightage. So that's why most diamonds were often limitedly faceted
[Guest]: when they were put in Mughal jewelry. When the idea of faceting comes very big and new
[Guest]: ways of cutting diamonds becomes important, the speed of excavation increases. And of
[Guest]: course the diamond mines are now more or less dry. And then the South African horde emerges
[Guest]: and diamond mining happens there in a crazy way. Now we're going to produce industrially
[Guest]: made diamonds, which are called piece diamonds or something like that. And that's going to
[Guest]: change the whole dynamic again. Now it's this that is really interesting and saddening and
[Guest]: all this. I don't want to leave it at some detached way of interesting. I want to have
[Guest]: an opinion about certain things. I want to say that lots of people were in some sort
[Guest]: of bonded labor in mines, but because you could only do so much with human hands and
[Guest]: certain kinds of machinery, it allowed for specialization to happen and it controlled
[Guest]: it in its own way, not because the intention was to control. I'm sure if there were people
[Guest]: able to get more out, they would try. But there are also some religious problems. Like
[Guest]: for example, you could not do everything under the earth because the... Now the earth doesn't
[Guest]: have the same kind of sanctity for many people. Even indigenous people who live in certain
[Guest]: parts of area are deeply involved in the extraction of wealth that was in land that was sacred
[Guest]: in one way or another. Sometimes there are no heroes. And the thing is that what we need
[Guest]: to understand is that when the technology of the earth mover came, it allowed for a
[Guest]: set of factors, the desacralization of the earth, the creation of large markets that
[Guest]: were globally networked, the intense real estatization of land. All these things came
[Guest]: together. The de-emphasis on investing in human beings and thinking more upon privileging
[Guest]: extraction. All these things were possible, not at one instant, but through a cascade
[Guest]: of things that come together. So I like that. Just like I talked about Gurshan Singh's teacup
[Guest]: as being a cascade of things at that very moment. And then everything kind of just pulls
[Guest]: back when you look at something else. So if I look at a podcast and I understand, say,
[Guest]: recording technology and the impact it had for, let's say, the wives to record their
[Guest]: voice and sing and have it recorded, I am Gauhar Jaan. Right? So it's so beautiful
[Guest]: to think that when the Kerala Saint, Narayan Guru. So he wrote, for example, that, and
[Guest]: this is also why I am not anti-industrializing. He says he's proselytizing to people who
[Guest]: are deeply underprivileged. So the metaphor he has for the soul is that your soul will
[Guest]: be, in his writing, he says that your soul will be like a steamship that goes up the
[Guest]: river. Or when the rifle comes into Southern India, Kama no longer holds bows and arrows,
[Guest]: he holds a rifle of love. The bullets of love are shot, right? Or pellets of love are shot.
[Guest]: I think this is really important. They're just such key moments, but we cannot take
[Guest]: the whole package for granted. We must break it down and remake it, break it down and remake
[Guest]: it because that's how it works. But if the process of continuing something extends over
[Guest]: long periods of time and people have very little agency in breaking it down, then it's
[Guest]: a real, it starts becoming more often than not oppressive. So we're able to still love
[Guest]: the family because it keeps breaking down. And then we put it back together in some new
[Guest]: formation.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you spoke exactly to my concerns when you spoke about people not having agency,
[Amit Varma]: the oppression it leads to, power, and that's a long discussion and we will do another six
[Amit Varma]: hour conversation someday in this because this cannot be a last conversation. So, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I'm now feeling that just in the same way that my show went from being a half an
[Amit Varma]: hour show to a three hour show, it should now go to a six hour show or an eight hour
[Amit Varma]: show. So you and I can do justice to the many things we want to talk about, but you have
[Amit Varma]: a flight to catch. So all hail industrial flights. And I'll end with a couple of questions
[Amit Varma]: which really intrigued me, things that you said earlier, while we were talking, which
[Amit Varma]: I found super interesting, and I want to double click on them. And one of them, like I asked
[Amit Varma]: you, what are the things you feel deep love for? And what are the things you have deep
[Amit Varma]: knowledge of? And you named a bunch of things and I'll go through them. But I'll ask you
[Amit Varma]: about one thing each. Like when you spoke of deep love, you spoke about places, children,
[Amit Varma]: partner, family, grandfather, work, India, yoga, the way the body lives in the world,
[Amit Varma]: which is so fascinating, friendship. And I think through the conversation, people would
[Amit Varma]: have got a pretty good sense of, you know, what all these things mean to you. But what
[Amit Varma]: I was most intrigued by in this deep love section was when you said, quote, love is
[Amit Varma]: my ethic, stop quote, which fascinates me. Tell me a bit about what you meant by that.
[Guest]: What a great question. I didn't expect that, actually. First of all, I want to say, because
[Guest]: the time will go and the time is going and I hope we will talk more and I will get to
[Guest]: talk to you as much as you have talked to me. So there are many ways to be in the world.
[Guest]: You can be deeply ambitious and then goal setting and those kinds of things. You can
[Guest]: be focused on, let's say, morality. There's some cord you can pick up and say, this is
[Guest]: going to become the ethic of my life. I think that love is a profound ethics because it's
[Guest]: not easily holdable. So it kind of, you can't control it. I mean, let's think about the
[Guest]: time when Sufi ideas of love enter into popular culture in India sometime around Amir Khusrow's
[Guest]: time. That's the 12th century. So he writes a song called Chaap Dilak, which is a song
[Guest]: in praise of his beer, his ustad, a beloved. And that song is still being sung today. And
[Guest]: it's the song that people use to talk about the radical nature of music or love or anything.
[Guest]: It's so deeply, deeply powerful. So if I say that love is very, it's an ethic, it means
[Guest]: that you do things, you find the love inside of you. You find a loving position in which,
[Guest]: with which to do mundane things, to which to do hard things, which things which you
[Guest]: don't like, things which have to be done, things to let things go. You must. It's a
[Guest]: way of engaging with life because you can make life about many things. But if you choose
[Guest]: to make a life, the ethics, the ethics of life, love, it changes many things. The woman
[Guest]: who started the Me Too movement, Tarana Burke, she was sexually molested when she was young.
[Guest]: Or maybe it was Tarana Burke and some other people involved in that movement. One of these
[Guest]: people said that she met the boy who sexually molested her much later in life. And what
[Guest]: she realized was, or maybe it was an older person, I forget, because there were several
[Guest]: instances, it's after all the Me Too movement, so it's going to come from somewhere. She
[Guest]: said that she didn't have any idea of punishing them. Because what was it that they could
[Guest]: be punished with that could possibly give back to her what was taken away from her?
[Guest]: I thought that was such a loving way of understanding yourself and your loss. So this is what I
[Guest]: mean about love, being in ethics. I think that a lot of times I practice silence because
[Guest]: that's the most loving thing I can do. Because if I talk, speech, words, there's not enough
[Guest]: love in any word to actually bring about the love that is required. So there are choices
[Guest]: you make. You talk about agency and it's so important to you. And I'm totally with you.
[Guest]: You have to give yourself the intention. What is being intentional? It is to be agentive.
[Guest]: I am intending to cook a nice meal today. I would like my child to have a nice tiffin
[Guest]: box. So that's an intention that's coming from love and care. So that means you don't
[Guest]: wait till 7.45 when the school bus is coming to cook that nice meal. You buy the groceries.
[Guest]: You get the gas in place. You make sure that you have the time, that you have the knowledge,
[Guest]: that you understand your child's environment at school. What is it possible for them to
[Guest]: eat? All these things are part of being loving. So it's a profound ethos.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm fascinated. You should, you know, the second time today, intentionality is coming
[Amit Varma]: up the first time in the context of noticing and now in the context of love that it's not
[Amit Varma]: something that you just spontaneously feel, but you make an effort. You make a look at
[Guest]: the beautiful aspect. You cannot force yourself. Effort is different from force. Deeply different.
[Guest]: You cannot. A lot of people force themselves to swallow shit that is completely not worth
[Guest]: the swallowing and also very unloving to the self and to the other person. I believe civil
[Guest]: disobedience is a profound act of love. I really believe in that. And I practice satyagraha
[Guest]: in many parts, including as a parent. Sometimes my kid does stuff I don't like. I practice
[Guest]: civil disobedience with her. So there's no reason why I have to do this, even engage
[Guest]: in a conflict with you just because you're my child. I told my students when I would
[Guest]: turn up, fly from Delhi to Hyderabad to teach them once a week for three days and fly back
[Guest]: and they couldn't be bothered to come on time. I said, I am here today. They came maybe two
[Guest]: hours into the class or one hour into the class. I would come from the airport, land
[Guest]: in Hyderabad, drive directly to class with my suitcase, be ready to teach. They wouldn't
[Guest]: turn up. This happened enough times. Then I said, I've met my contractual obligations.
[Guest]: I have been here. There is no where in my contract that says I have to teach when you
[Guest]: are not here. So I'm going to practice civil disobedience. And somehow that sort of started
[Guest]: touching them a little bit, a little bit, a little bit, a little bit. I practiced it
[Guest]: in several ways. But yes, I think love is a deeply ethical. It's an ethics. Love is
[Amit Varma]: an ethics.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm reminded of a couple of things and one is from what you just said, civil disobedience.
[Amit Varma]: The very dear friend whose house I'm staying at in Delhi, Mohit Satyanand, he told me the
[Amit Varma]: story of once how next door to him, there was this sort of office or a working environment
[Amit Varma]: and people would go out and I forget exactly what it was, either leave cigarette butts
[Amit Varma]: in the road or leave teacups, one of those two, and they would just leave it there. And
[Amit Varma]: he asked them politely once, can they please not litter? And they didn't do it. So the
[Amit Varma]: next day he went out and he collected everything that they had littered and he put it away
[Amit Varma]: himself. And he did it a couple of times and it completely stopped. And the other example
[Amit Varma]: is from this great book I'm reading called Think Again by Adam Grant, where he talks
[Amit Varma]: about this African American piano player called Darryl Davis, who goes to a gig in Maryland
[Amit Varma]: in 1983. And over there, he just does a great gig. And after that, a white gentleman comes
[Amit Varma]: up to him and says, wow, that was amazing. And he realizes that the white gentleman is
[Amit Varma]: a member of the KKK, the Ku Klux Klan, but they have a drink together. And then he starts
[Amit Varma]: talking to the guy, asking him questions and so on. And the guy eventually reforms, not
[Amit Varma]: just reforms, gets his other white supremacist friends. And, you know, and over a period
[Amit Varma]: of time, there is this change that is happening just because you're talking to this person
[Amit Varma]: and he's talking to them. And this leads me in a bit of a digression, but this leads me
[Amit Varma]: to something I've come to realize more and more, that the hate that we have within us
[Amit Varma]: is for abstract things, that when we encounter them in the concrete, we don't hate them.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you will, for example, Achal in her episode, Achal Malhotra told me about
[Amit Varma]: how when she was in Pakistan, people would rant and rave against Hindus, but then they
[Amit Varma]: would notice she's there and she said, tum nahi beti, tum theek ho, tum nahi. So in the
[Amit Varma]: concrete, I know a lot of people who are bigots on Twitter, in the concrete, they'll be nice
[Amit Varma]: to their Muslim friends, but treat them like exceptions. And the problem is when abstract
[Amit Varma]: concepts like nationalism and race and all this nonsense gets into it, that there is
[Amit Varma]: hatred. And when I read this, you know, incident about Darrell Davis, which is in the sixth
[Amit Varma]: chapter of Grant's book, I just thought that this is such a great example of these bigots
[Amit Varma]: who hate a particular kind of person. But when they meet a person like that in the concrete,
[Guest]: they can be changed, you know? So I often feel that it's a good idea. I don't know if
[Guest]: love is transactional or not transactional, ethics are relational or not relational. I
[Guest]: know that, I know the ideas behind those kinds of ideas. I'm not interested in them at a
[Guest]: point as a way of living. I'm interested in them maybe in a mild way to read about them.
[Guest]: But actually, love as ethics means that you are both deeply aware of the dynamism of life
[Guest]: and also deeply non-transactional. Otherwise, transaction itself can be a deeply loving
[Guest]: thing. So the first time I often go to a new place, I go shopping. Nothing spectacular.
[Guest]: I love the love that you exchange at a very simple level. Koi bhi threatening cheez nahi
[Guest]: hai. Aapne ek dal muri kharid liya. You bought a nariyal paani or you bought a set of bangles
[Guest]: or maybe a pot or something. And you find out so many things about yourself and the
[Guest]: other person in that transaction. But there is a way to do that transaction in a non-transactional
[Guest]: way. That's the loving part. You're attentive to the attention he's giving you. You're attentive
[Guest]: to how he positions that project. I mean, I can go on and on. It's unnecessary. But
[Guest]: I really feel like that's a good way to live for me. It works.
[Amit Varma]: So my next question is related. What I also then asked you about is what do you have deep
[Amit Varma]: knowledge of? And you mentioned a bunch of things which we will explore in our next conversation
[Amit Varma]: together, which I hope you will be kind enough to allow me at some point. But you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: things like teaching, individuals, ideas, this country, cooking, textiles. But you also
[Amit Varma]: at this point while talking about this said another interesting thing which I want to
[Amit Varma]: dig down on. And you said, quote, knowledge and love are not far apart.
[Guest]: Yes. Oh, what a beautiful way to wrap up this conversation. Thank you. I just love this
[Guest]: country. My parents moved to America and they became American citizens. My sister was born
[Guest]: there. She's an American citizen. I have this extremely thick middle Atlantic accent because
[Guest]: along with changing my name, they put me into speech therapy because I did not have.
[Guest]: I have no problem. I just kind of reflect on this thing happened to me. I have no problem
[Guest]: with it, but it's not something I can shed very easily because it came and was so ingrained
[Guest]: in me. So even now I have this accent when I talk.
[Guest]: The white doll your grandfather could not throw away.
[Guest]: The white doll grandfather could not throw away, which has become me in some way. My
[Guest]: grandfather wasn't around then. So I love this country and I have to love it like this
[Guest]: with the American accent. And I get into so many unpleasant situations because people
[Guest]: judge me a lot because I wear saris or I have this accent or I have white hair. If you want
[Guest]: to start judging people, there are hundreds of ways to do it, right? And when I step out
[Guest]: into this country, this is a moment like another sanskari moment for you. So we get everything
[Guest]: connected. So I went to the 2012 Kumbh Mela. I was asked by my friend Ranveer Shah to come
[Guest]: and talk to some students that had come from an American university there. And of course
[Guest]: there's lots of free time and then you walk around and you watch all the sadhu babas and
[Guest]: sadhvis and everything. And I noticed that at one particular place, grouping of sadhus,
[Guest]: there was a guy from Japan with all his jeta jhuta and everything and there and then there
[Guest]: was another place that was a guy from California. And as I kept walking, I was there for three
[Guest]: days and I walked and walked and walked through the Kumbh Mela and I realized that India is
[Guest]: still a place where you could be on the far horizon of consciousness or desire or want
[Guest]: that people believe India is a place you can come to and you can be that and you can maybe
[Guest]: make a community out of it. So I love that. So I know this about this country because
[Guest]: I have, I'm a person from Andhra Pradesh but I grew up in Bhopal and Hyderabad and I lived
[Guest]: in Bangalore for many years and I also lived in Delhi and I lived in Punjab, many places.
[Guest]: What I love about what I love about this country is I feel like there's a possibility of making
[Guest]: a community and because we are 1.3 billion people, your community can be pretty big.
[Guest]: And I think that's important. For me, that's important that people have an opportunity
[Guest]: to do that if they want. So better or worse, it's there.
[Amit Varma]: I was actually drilling down on the quote, knowledge and love are not part of it.
[Guest]: So I'm coming to that. I'm coming to that. So these are these observations. And then
[Guest]: when I started, looked at myself making such observations, I said, why is this possible
[Guest]: for me? That's because I know this country so well. I have been on the Indrail Pass twice
[Guest]: and traveled across this country. I have lived in Northern India. I have lived in Southern
[Guest]: India. I have spent vast amounts of time in Calcutta. I have lived in rural India. I work
[Guest]: on many different things associated with various pockets of this country. I know it and know
[Guest]: it and know it and know it. And at a point, I can't tell you where my love begins and
[Guest]: where my knowledge ends and where my knowledge begins and where my love begins. Where else
[Guest]: could I live that I know this well?
[Amit Varma]: This is a beautiful way to end the episode. Annapurna, thank you so much. Annapurna, Apoorna
[Amit Varma]: and Anna, the white dog and Sandy. And Bhavani. Not just in names, but we contain multitudes
[Amit Varma]: in so many different ways. And I guess knowledge of them is what brings the love, right? So
[Unknown]: thank you so much.
[Unknown]: Thank you so much for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to the show notes, enter rabbit
[Amit Varma]: holes at will. Annapurna doesn't seem to be on Twitter, but you can follow me at Amit
[Amit Varma]: Varma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.